https://www.1mg.com/diseases/anal-cancer-487#

ANAL CANCER
Anal cancerAlso known as Anal carcinoma or Cancer of the anus
OVERVIEW
Overview
Anal cancer is a rare type of cancer that develops in the tissues of the anus, the opening at the end of the digestive tract where you pass stool. It typically occurs when healthy cells in the anal lining change, often associated with infection by the human papillomavirus (HPV).

Although anal cancer is uncommon, it makes up less than 2% of all gastrointestinal cancers; its rates are rising worldwide. Bleeding from the anus or rectum, pain or a lump near the anus, itching, or changes in bowel habits are some of the common symptoms linked to anal cancer.


Factors like HPV infection, multiple sexual partners, receptive anal intercourse, smoking, age (most cases occur in people over 50), and weakened immunity, such as inHIV infections, can increase anal cancer risk.


Treatment usually involves a combination of chemotherapy and radiation therapy, with surgery in case of advanced or persistent cases.
KEY FACTS
Key FactsUsually seen inAdults over 50 years of ageGender affectedBoth men and women, but more common in womenBody part(s) involvedAnusRectum
PrevalenceWorldwide:0.35 per 100,000 in men and 0.57 per 100,000 in women (2022)Mimicking ConditionsCondylomata acuminataHemorrhoidSkin tagAnal fissure or fistulaChancroidPsoriasis
Necessary health tests/imaging
Biopsy

High-resolution anoscopy (HRA)

Imaging:Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI pelvis), Computed tomography (CT) scan,Positron emission tomography – computed tomography (PET-CT) scan.
Additional tests:Endoanal ultrasound and Colonoscopy.Treatment
Definitive chemoradiation (CRT):Mitomycin-C + 5 5-fluorouracil (FU) andCapecitabine.

Surgery:Abdominoperineal resection (APR)

Platinum- and taxane-based chemotherapy:Carboplatin+paclitaxel.

Immunotherapy or targeted agents:Pembrolizumab,Nivolumab, and Retifanlimab

Radiation therapy
Specialists to consultColorectal surgeonMedical oncologistRadiation oncologistGastroenterologist
See All
SYMPTOMS OF ANAL CANCER
Symptoms Of Anal Cancer

Anal cancer is a rare cancer, and early detection is important, as symptoms can mimic common conditions like hemorrhoids. Common symptoms include:
Bleeding from the rectumPain or pressure in the anal areaA lump or growth near the anusPersistentitchingor discharge from the anusChange in bowel habits, like narrow stools orconstipation.

If you notice any of these symptoms, don’t panic, but don’t delay either. Getting the right guidance early can make all the difference. We’re here to support you with cancer care on Tata 1mg every step of the way.
Explore The Platform
CAUSES OF ANAL CANCER
Causes Of Anal Cancer

Most cases of anal cancer, especially squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), are linked to a long-term infection with the human papillomavirus (HPV), particularly high-risk types like HPV-16 and HPV-18.


HPV typically infects cells in a sensitive area of the anal canal known as the transition zone. The virus makes special proteins that “switch off” the body’s natural tumor-protection systems. This makes the infected cells grow uncontrollably.


Before turning into cancer, abnormal cells form a condition called anal intraepithelial neoplasia (AIN), which has 3 grades (mild to severe). About10% of severeAIN cases can progress to cancer, and the risk is higher in people with weakened immunity.


In addition to HPV’s effects, damaged genes and changes in growth pathways can further fuel cancer growth. Some anal cancers also show changes that help the tumor hide from the immune system.
RISK FACTORS FOR ANAL CANCER
Risk Factors For Anal Cancer

The development of anal cancer is linked to several risk factors. Some of the most notable risk factors include:

HPV infection:Human papillomavirus (especially HPV-16) is the main cause of anal cancer. It spreads through sexual contact and can lead to long-term infection in the anal canal.

Stay protected at every age. Book your adult vaccination today with Tata 1mg and safeguard your health for the future.
Schedule Now


HIV infection:People living with HIV have weakened immunity, making them more likely to develop anal cancer compared to the general population.

Smoking:Tobacco damages the anal lining at the genetic level, increasing the risk of cancer.

Chronic immunosuppression (non-HIV related):People with weakened immune systems due to conditions like autoimmune diseases, organ transplants, or certain blood cancers face a higher risk.

Men who have sex with men (MSM):Studies suggest that MSM are about 20 times more likely to get anal cancer than heterosexual men.

Females:Women are at higher risk than men, partly because HPV infections are more common among women.

Older age:Anal cancer usually occurs in older adults as DNA damage accumulates over time.

Use of oral contraceptives:Long-term use of birth control pills has been linked to a slightly increased risk of anal cancer in women, likely due to hormonal influence on HPV-related changes.

Women who have never given birth:Women who have never had children appear to have a slightly higher risk, possibly related to hormonal and lifestyle factors.
Tubal ligation:Some studies suggest that women who have undergone this procedure to avoid future pregnancies may have a modestly higher risk of anal cancer.Did You Know?
Not living with a partner can increase your risk. Being single or not cohabiting has been associated with a higher risk, possibly because of differences in sexual health practices or delayed healthcare seeking.
DIAGNOSIS OF ANAL CANCER
Diagnosis Of Anal Cancer

Anal cancer diagnosis is crucial as early detection can yield good outcomes. Staging is then done using the TNM staging guides for treatment planning.


TNM CLASSIFICATION FOR ANAL CANCER
TNM classification for anal cancer
T (Primary tumour)
TX:Cannot assess the primary tumor
T0:No evidence of primary tumor
Tis:High-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (e.g., carcinoma in situ; AIN II–III)
T1:Tumor ≤ 2 cm in greatest dimension
T2:Tumor > 2 cm but ≤ 5 cm
T3:Tumor > 5 cm
T4:Tumor of any size invading adjacent organs like the vagina, urethra, or bladder.



N (Regional lymph nodes)
NX:Regional lymph nodes cannot be assessed
N0:No regional lymph node metastasis
N1:Metastasis in regional lymph nodes
N1a:Inguinal, mesorectal, or internal iliac lymph nodes
N1b:External iliac lymph nodes
N1c:Involves both external iliac and any N1a nodes



M (Distant metastasis or spread of the cancer)
M0:No distant metastasis
M1:Distant metastasis, like the liver or lungs.



Diagnosis consists of:

HISTORY AND PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
History and physical examination

A complete medical history, including rectal symptoms and risk factors, is taken.
It is then followed by a physical exam and digital rectal exam (DRE), which is critical for initial detection.
In women, this includes a gynecological exam as well.



BIOPSY
Biopsy

Any suspicious lesions found on inspection or palpation must undergo biopsy to confirm a cancer diagnosis.



HIGH-RESOLUTION ANOSCOPY (HRA)
High-resolution anoscopy (HRA)

An anoscopy is a simple medical procedure in which a doctor uses a small, rigid, tube-like instrument called an anoscope to look inside the anus and lower rectum.

Enhanced anoscopy with magnification (HRA) is used to closely examine the anal lining and guide targeted biopsy for early lesions.



IMAGING
Imaging

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI pelvis):MRI of the pelvis is the preferred method for detailed evaluation of tumor size, location, and nearby tissue involvement.

Computed tomography (CT) scan:CT scans of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis help assess potential distant spread.

Positron emission tomography – computed tomography (PET-CT) scan:It accurately detects lymph node involvement or metastasis and often leads to changes in staging or treatment plans.



ADDITIONAL TESTS
Additional tests

Endoanal ultrasound:This is an imaging test that uses sound waves via a small probe in the anus to visualize the anal canal and nearby tissues.  It is useful for evaluating tumor depth in the anal sphincter when MRI isn't available.

Colonoscopy:A procedure where a flexible tube with a camera is inserted into the rectum to examine the entire colon for abnormalities. It is not routinely required unless other abnormalities are suspected.

Looking for a reliable place to get all your tests done? Book with Tata 1mg for accurate and on-time results.
Get Tested
SPECIALISTS TO VISIT
Specialists To Visit

Anal cancer management requires a team of specialists to work together to provide the best care. They include:
Colorectal surgeonMedical oncologistRadiation oncologistGastroenterologist

Acolorectal surgeonperforms biopsies, surgeries, and manages anal or rectal conditions.

Amedical oncologistprescribes and monitors chemotherapy or targeted cancer treatments.

Aradiation oncologistplans and delivers radiation therapy to shrink or control tumors.

Agastroenterologisthelps with diagnosis using procedures like anoscopy and colonoscopy, and manages digestive health.

When to see a doctor?

Visit a doctor if there is:
Bleeding from the anus or rectumPain, lump, or swelling near the anusPersistent itching or dischargeChange in bowel habits.

Consult a professional promptly if you notice these symptoms, as early diagnosis can make all the difference.
Connect Now
PREVENTION OF ANAL CANCER
Prevention Of Anal Cancer

Anal cancer prevention starts with vaccination and making healthy lifestyle choices. Tips that can help reduce the risk include:

GET HPV VACCINATION
Get HPV vaccination

Vaccination protects against the most cancer-causing strains of HPV, responsible for ~93% of anal cancers
It is best to take for adolescents aged 9–14 years, ideally before sexual activity begins.
Both females and males aged 15–45 years can also receive the vaccine, even if sexually active.

HPV vaccine schedule:

Ages 9–14 years:2-dose series at 0 and 6 months
Ages 15–45 years:3-dose series at 0, 1–2, and 6 months

Ready to stay protected?
Get expert guidance tailored to your city and schedule a seamless, at-home vaccination appointment.
Book Your Slot

GIVE IMPORTANCE TO SCREENING
Give importance to screening

Regular screening helps detect precancerous changes (AIN) and anal cancer early
Tests may include a digital rectal exam, an anal Pap test, an anoscopy, or a high-resolution anoscopy.

PRACTISE SAFE SEX
Practise safe sex

Use condoms correctly every time to reduce HPV transmission risk
Remember that HPV spreads through skin-to-skin contact, so protection is helpful but not foolproof.

Protect yourself and your partner with our trusted options now and choose condoms for safer intimacy.
Shop Here

MAINTAIN HIV TREATMENT
Maintain HIV treatment

For HIV-positive individuals, regular antiretroviral therapy strengthens the immune system and lowers cancer risk.

QUIT SMOKING
Quit smoking

Stopping smoking lowers the risk of anal and many other cancers.

Take the first step today, explore nicotine gums, patches, and other quit-smoking aids to support your journey.
Try Now
TREATMENT OF ANAL CANCER
Treatment Of Anal Cancer

Anal cancer treatment has advanced significantly, with most people with this type of cancer benefiting from organ-preserving chemoradiation as the standard of care. Treatment options

DEFINITIVE CHEMORADIATION (CRT)
Definitive chemoradiation (CRT)

This treatment aims to save the anal organ without the need for major surgery. It has been very effective in controlling the cancer while helping most patients avoid a permanent colostomy bag. Most commonly used drugs:Mitomycin-C + 5 5-fluorouracil (FU)Capecitabine



SURGERY
Surgery

Abdominoperineal resection (APR) is a major surgery where the anus and rectum are removed, and the person passes stool through a permanent opening in the belly (colostomy).

Note: Colostomy is a surgical opening made in the abdomen to allow stool to leave the body into a bag, instead of through the anus.


Platinum- and taxane-based chemotherapy

This treatment is usually given when the cancer has spread or cannot be removed by surgery. Recent studies show that adding newer medicines called immunotherapy drugs to chemotherapy may help improve outcomes in some patients.Carboplatin+paclitaxelis the most commonly used combination.

IMMUNOTHERAPY OR TARGETED AGENTS
Immunotherapy or targeted agents



Newer medicines called PD-1 inhibitors (a type of immunotherapy) are showing promise for advanced or recurrent anal cancer. These drugs help the body’s immune system recognize and attack cancer cells. Examples include:
PembrolizumabNivolumabRetifanlimab

RADIATION THERAPY
Radiation therapy

Modern radiation techniques, like IMRT or proton therapy, are designed to target the cancer more precisely. This helps kill the tumor while reducing damage to nearby healthy tissues, lowering side effects, and improving quality of life.


Note: Anal cancer required a multidisciplinary care with colorectal surgery, radiation oncology, medical oncology, supportive care/nutrition, and stomach care when needed. It improves outcomes and survivorship.

From everyday essentials to specialized medicines, discover them all at Tata 1mg—India’s largest and most trusted online pharmacy.
Buy Here
HOME-CARE FOR ANAL CANCER
Home-care For Anal Cancer

Home remedies are not a substitute for medical treatment. They are meant to support you during anal cancer therapy, help manage symptoms, and should always be used after consulting your doctor. Here are a few effective home-care measures:

ADD SKIN CARE DURING RADIATION
Add skin care during radiation

Use gentle, unscented soaps and keep the area clean and dry
Apply doctor-recommended soothing creams or aloe-based gels to ease irritation.

Radiation therapy often causes skin burns or irritation. Good skincare helps reduce discomfort. Try our widest range of skincare products for all your needs.
Fill Your Cart

TRY SITZ BATHS
Try sitz baths

Sitting in warm water for 10–15 minutes can soothe pain, itching, or irritation around the anus.
Commonly recommended for people with anal cancer undergoing radiation or surgery.

FOCUS ON DIET AND HYDRATION
Focus on diet and hydration

Eating high fibre foods like  fruits, vegetables, whole grains, and drinking plenty of water helps prevent constipation, which is common with pain medicines
Avoid spicy, oily, highly processed foods, red/processed meats, and alcohol, as they can worsen digestive discomfort and irritation during anal cancer treatment.

TAKE CARE OFNAUSEA
Take care ofnausea

During chemo or radiation, nausea and loss of appetite are common
Light, frequent meals with bland foods can help
Gingeror peppermint tea has been studied for easing nausea and digestive discomfort during chemotherapy.

CONSIDER HERBAL AND NUTRITIONAL SUPPLEMENTS
Consider herbal and nutritional supplements

Some herbs like ginger,turmeric, and vitamins likevitamin Care studied for easing nausea, boosting energy, or reducing inflammation.
However, they may interact with medicines, so always check with your doctor first.

Boost your immunity and support healing with Vitamin C. Find trusted Vitamin C supplements on Tata 1mg.
Buy Now

REDUCE PELVIC DISCOMFORT
Reduce pelvic discomfort

Gentle exercises and breathing techniques can ease pelvic discomfort and improve bowel control
Ice packs or sitting on soft cushions may reduce pain and pressure in the pelvic area.



Check out the wide range of ice bags and cool pads available at Tata 1mg.
Click Here
COMPLICATIONS OF ANAL CANCER
Complications Of Anal Cancer

Treatment-related side effects of chemoradiation for anal cancer can include the following:

ACUTE TOXICITIES (WITHIN 3 MONTHS OF TREATMENT)
Acute toxicities (within 3 months of treatment)
Pain and swelling inside the anus or rectumRectal or anal bleeding during recoveryBladder irritation causing frequent or painful urination (cystitis)DiarrheaDehydrationInflammation of the intestines causing abdominal painNeutropenia (low white blood cells, making infections more likely)Pain in the lower pelvic or anal areaSkin irritation, redness, or sores around the anus.
LATE TOXICITIES (AFTER 3 MONTHS OF TREATMENT)
Late toxicities (after 3 months of treatment)
Ongoing discomfort in the anal or pelvic areaBlockage in the intestine causing severe pain and vomitingLoss of interest in sexual activityDifficulty controlling bowel movementsFistula(an abnormal tunnel forming between organs like the anus and skin)Erectile dysfunctionPersistent sores in the treated areaOsteomyelitis  osteonecrosis (bone infection or bone tissue death)Pelvic fracturesStrictures, i.e., the narrowing of the anal or rectal passageUrinary incontinenceVaginal stenosis (narrowing of the vaginal canal).
ALTERNATIVE THERAPIES FOR ANAL CANCER
Alternative Therapies For Anal Cancer

Complementary therapies for anal cancer care should be used alongside medical treatment and never as a replacement. Always consult your doctor before trying any therapy. Effective therapies include:

1. ACUPUNCTURE AND ACUPRESSURE
1. Acupuncture and acupressure

These therapies use fine needles or gentle pressure on specific points of the body. They may help relieve nausea,vomiting, and pain caused by chemotherapy or radiation.

2. MIND-BODY PRACTICES
2. Mind-body practices

Techniques like relaxation, guided imagery, hypnosis, and music therapy can help calm the mind and reducestress. They can easeanxiety, improve sleep, and give short-term relief from pain and treatment discomfort.

3. MASSAGE  OR TOUCH THERAPIES
3. Massage  or touch therapies

Gentle massage or applying pressure to certain points (reflexology) may improve mood, reduce fatigue ortiredness, and provide comfort during recovery.


LIVING WITH ANAL CANCER
Living With Anal Cancer

Living with anal cancer doesn’t just affect your health during treatment; it also impacts your daily life and recovery in the months that follow. Focusing on self-care, emotional well-being, and regular follow-ups can make your journey smoother. Here are a few important things to remember:

TAKE CARE OF YOURSELF
Take care of yourself
Eat a nutritious diet with fruits, vegetables, and whole grains to help your body heal
Make sure you rest well and try simple stress-relieving practices like meditation, light yoga, or deep breathing
Fatigue is very common during and after treatment
Focus on essential tasks, take breaks often, and ask family or friends to help with daily chores when needed.

COPE WITH EMOTIONS
Cope with emotions
A cancer diagnosis can bring feelings of anxiety, sadness, or fear
Stay connected with loved ones, share your feelings, and consider joining a support group to talk with others who are going through the same experience.

MANAGE THE COST OF CARE
Manage the cost of care
Treatment expenses can be stressful
Discuss costs openly with your doctor, and explore support services or organizations that can help with treatment, medicines, travel, or housing.



CONTINUE FOLLOW-UP CARE
Continue follow-up care
Follow up every 3 months for the first 2 years, then every 6 months for the next 3 years, to detect recurrence early
Doctors check and guide care for anal skin irritation, ulcers, or pain from treatment
Monitoring for bowel, urinary, and sexual health issues, along with support for fatigue, appetite loss, pain, or sleep problems
Report any new symptoms promptly.

Empower yourself in your cancer journey with trusted guidance and support. Explore our platform for expert help on treatment, nutrition, recovery, and financial assistance.
Click NowDid our information help you?In our relentless endeavour to keep improving our services, you are our eyes. Kindly take out sometime to guide us on how to serve your better.Share your feedbackSubscribe to stay informedSubscribe to our carefully crafted informative emailers by Medical Experts and be the first to get the latest health news, tips and important updates.SubmitDisclaimerTata 1mg's sole intention is to ensure that its consumers get information that is expert-reviewed, accurate and trustworthy. However, the information contained herein should NOT be used as a substitute for the advice of a qualified physician. The information provided here is for informational purposes only. This may not cover all possible side effects, drug interactions or warnings or alerts. Please consult your doctor and discuss all your queries related to any disease or medicine. We intend to support, not replace, the doctor-patient relationship.

--- REFERENCES ---

- Jankowski JA, et al. Anal cancer: epidemiology, screening and management. PMCID: PMC11372733. [Internet]. 2007 [cited 2025 Aug 27]. Available from:  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11372733/#)
- Darragh TM, et al. Anal cancer and screening: current perspectives. PMCID: PMC3616949. [Internet]. 2013 [cited 2025 Aug 27]. Available from:  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3616949/#sec14)
- National Center for Biotechnology Information. Anal Cancer. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2024 [cited 2025 Aug 27]. Available from  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK441891/#article-17506.s5)
- Jankowski JA, et al. Pathophysiology of anal cancer. PMCID: PMC11372733. [Internet]. 2007 [cited 2025 Aug 27]. Available from:  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11372733/#sec3)
- Alemany L, et al. Human papillomavirus DNA prevalence in anal cancer: a pooled analysis. Br J Cancer. 2015;112:135-143. Available from:  (https://www.nature.com/articles/bjc201589)
- Ajani JA, et al. Anal cancer: treatment and outcomes. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2014;90:255–270. Available from:  (https://www.thegreenjournal.com/article/S0167-8140(14)00176-5/fulltext)
- Palefsky JM, et al. Epidemiology and natural history of anal cancer. PubMed. 2016;27889036. Available from:  (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27889036/)
- Glynne-Jones R, et al. Anal cancer: treatment toxicities and supportive care. PMCID: PMC10174401. [Internet]. 2023 [cited 2025 Aug 27]. Available from:  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10174401/)
- National Cancer Institute. Anal Cancer. [Internet]. 2024 [cited 2025 Aug 27]. Available from:  (https://www.cancer.gov/types/anal)
- Anal Cancer Foundation. Prevention of anal cancer. [Internet]. 2024 [cited 2025 Aug 27]. Available from:  (https://www.analcancerfoundation.org/what-is-anal-cancer/prevention/)
- Association of Physicians of India. Indian Consensus Guideline on Adult Immunization. [Internet]. 2022 [cited 2025 Aug 27]. Available from:  (https://www.apiindia.org/reader/Indian%20Consensus%20Guideline%20on%20Adult%20Immunization)
- Palefsky JM, et al. HPV-related anal cancer prevention. PMCID: PMC9157211. [Internet]. 2022 [cited 2025 Aug 27]. Available from:  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9157211/)
- Liyanage S, et al. Anal cancer management and outcomes. J Clin Med. 2024;13:2156. Available from:  (https://www.mdpi.com/2077-0383/13/8/2156)
- Daling JR, et al. Risk factors for anal cancer in women. PubMed. 2011;22117576. Available from  (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22117576/)
- Chinai JM, et al. Chemoradiation toxicities in anal cancer. PMCID: PMC4818021. [Internet]. 2016 [cited 2025 Aug 27]. Available from:  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4818021/)
- Ma J, et al. Anal cancer incidence and trends. PubMed. 2020;33197662. Available from:  (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33197662/)
- Mustian KM, et al. Exercise and symptom management in anal cancer. PMCID: PMC8762594. [Internet]. 2022 [cited 2025 Aug 27]. Available from:  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8762594/)
- Furlan AD, et al. Complementary therapies in cancer care. BMC Complement Med Ther. 2022;22:337. Available from:  (https://bmccomplementmedtherapies.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12906-022-03537-w)
- Eng C, et al. Anal cancer: treatment outcomes. Eur J Cancer. 2019;115:24-32. Available from:  (https://www.ejcancer.com/article/S0959-8049(19)30089-9/abstract)
- Arnold M, et al. Global burden of anal cancer. PMCID: PMC9771908. [Internet]. 2022 [cited 2025 Aug 27]. Available from  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9771908/)
