https://www.1mg.com/diseases/anaphylaxis-947#

ANAPHYLAXIS
AnaphylaxisAlso known as Severe allergic reaction, Hypersensitivity reaction, Anaphylactic shock, and Allergic shock.
OVERVIEW
Overview
Anaphylaxis is a severe, life-threatening allergic reaction that can affect multiple systems of the body at the same time. Common triggers of this reaction include certain foods, insect stings, some medications, or latex. However, anaphylaxis is rare. The majority of people, even those with allergies, might never suffer from an episode of anaphylaxis.

The symptoms of anaphylaxis include tongue swelling, vomiting, difficulty in breathing, mental confusion and even shock. These symptoms occur due to over reaction of the immune system.

People with allergies,asthmaand a family history of anaphylaxis are at a higher risk of anaphylaxis. If someone is at a higher risk or has a known serious allergy, avoidance is the best form of treatment.

Anaphylaxis requires immediate medical treatment because if it is not treated timely or properly, it can be fatal. If someone has a history of a serious allergic reaction, it is important always to carry an adrenaline(epinephrine) kit.

Accurate diagnosis and successful management of allergies is essential to prevent any  anaphylactic reactions in the future. An allergist or immunologist, has specialized training and experience to diagnose the problem and develop a prevention plan.
KEY FACTS
Key FactsUsually seen inInfants between 0-2 years of ageGender affectedBoth men and women but more common in womenBody part(s) involvedSkinRespiratory systemGastrointestinal systemCardio-vascular systemCentral nervous systemPrevalenceWorldwide:0.3–5.1% (2020)India:0.14% (2020)Mimicking ConditionsCarcinoid syndromeSepsisSeizureFood poisoningAnxiety/panic attackPulmonary embolismAcuteasthmaCerebrovascular eventHyperventilationSyncope (faint)Autonomic epilepsyNecessary health tests/imagingLaboratory tests:Skin prick testing, Serum-specific IgE, and Serum enzyme tryptaseTreatmentAlpha-adrenergic receptor:AdrenalineAntihistamine:DiphenhydramineorCetirizineVasopressors:Norepinephrine,vasopressinBeta antagonistsGlucocorticosteroidsSpecialists to consultGeneral physicianAllergistImmunologistSee All
SYMPTOMS OF ANAPHYLAXIS
Symptoms Of Anaphylaxis

As anaphylaxis is a generalized systemic reaction, a wide variety of clinical signs and symptoms involving the skin, gastrointestinal and respiratory tracts, and cardiovascular system can be observed. The most common clinical manifestations include:
Cutaneous (skin) symptoms:Red, hot, and itchy rashesPale and cold skinUrticaria(skin rashes)


Respiratory symptoms:WheezingStridor (high pitched sound on respiration)Difficulty in breathingGaspingBronchospasm (tightness of muscles lining the lungs)


Cardiovascular symptoms:Tachycardia (increased heart rate)Hypotension (low blood pressure)Bradycardia (decreased heart rate)


GI symptoms:NauseaVomitingAbdominal painDiarrhea


Neurological symptoms:LightheadednessConfusionLoss of consciousness


Conjunctival (eye) symptomsErythema (redness)Pruritus (itching)Excessive tearing


Other symptomsSense of impending doomTinglingAnxietyMetallic taste in the mouthLaryngeal edema (swelling in the throat)Uterine cramps and bleeding

Read more about allergic conditions.
Click Here
CAUSES OF ANAPHYLAXIS
Causes Of Anaphylaxis

Triggers generally cause anaphylaxis and it’s very important to know what triggered the reaction. The most common triggers include:
1. FOOD
1. Food
Common triggers include peanuts, walnuts, pecans, fish, shellfish, cow’s milk, eggs, red meat, prawns, shrimp, and lobster.

Want to know which food you are allergic to? There is a test for it that measures the levels of allergen-specific antibodies.Know More

2. MEDICATIONS
2. Medications
It includes antibiotics (penicillin, cephalosporins), NSAIDs (diclofenac, disprin, paracetamol), anesthesia drugs, muscle relaxants, β-blockers, ACE inhibitors.


3. LATEX
3. Latex
Found in gloves, IV tubes, syringes, adhesive tapes, catheters

Healthcare workers, children with spina bifida and genitourinary abnormalities, and people who work with natural latex are at higher risk for latex-induced anaphylaxis. Shop latex-free products.
Visit Here

4. INSECT STINGS
4. Insect stings
Common triggers include bees, wasps, hornets, yellowjackets, fire ants.


5. VACCINES
5. Vaccines
Some patients can also develop anaphylaxis following immunization. The majority of cases of vaccine-associated anaphylaxis include vaccination from:
Measles, mumps, and rubella (MMR) vaccine
Japanese encephalitis vaccine
Diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis (DPT)
Hepatitis A and B vaccineDid you know?
Very rarely, an anaphylactic reaction can occur post-COVID 19 vaccination as well. Get all your queries answered on COVID 19 vaccination.Read Now
RISK FACTORS FOR ANAPHYLAXIS
Risk Factors For Anaphylaxis

Anaphylaxis is a life-threatening type I hypersensitivity reaction, triggered by exposure to a wide range of antigens that involve multiple organ systems. Risk factors for anaphylaxis include:
1.CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASES
1.Cardiovascular diseases
Preexisting cardiovascular disease is a risk factor for fatal anaphylactic reactions or lasting morbidity due to myocardial infarction (heart attack) or stroke induced by anaphylaxis.
2.ASTHMA
2.Asthma
Poor asthma control remains a risk factor for severe anaphylaxis, especially in children.

Want to know the basics of asthma? The second Tuesday of May is observed as World Asthma Day with the aim to raise awareness about the condition and its management.

Know more about all the things you need to understand about asthma.
Read This

3. MASTOCYTOSIS
3. Mastocytosis
It is a rare condition caused by an excess number of mast cells (a type of immune cells) gathering in the body's tissues. Adult patients and children with extensive skin disease with mastocytosis have an increased risk to develop severe anaphylaxis.
4. AGE
4. Age
It has been observed that the first anaphylactic episode mostly occurs in the age group 0–2 years. Also, older age has been consistently associated with a higher rate of fatal drug anaphylaxis.

Read about the common causes of skin allergy in kids.
Tap Here

5. PREVIOUS ANAPHYLACTIC REACTION
5. Previous anaphylactic reaction
The risk of serious reaction increases if you've had anaphylaxis once and future reactions might be more severe than the first reaction.
6. GENDER
6. Gender
Adult women suffer more frequently from anaphylaxis induced by food, drugs, and radiocontrast agents along with idiopathic anaphylaxis compared to adult men.
7. ALCOHOL
7. Alcohol
Allergy to alcohol can cause symptoms ranging from mild, such as an itchy mouth or eyes, to severe, including vomiting or anaphylaxis.
8. EXERCISE
8. Exercise
Exercise-induced anaphylaxis is a rare but potentially life-threatening clinical syndrome in which association with exercise is crucial. The range of physical activities can be as mild as walking.
DIAGNOSIS OF ANAPHYLAXIS
Diagnosis Of Anaphylaxis

To diagnose your risk of anaphylaxis or to determine whether previous symptoms were anaphylaxis-related, your allergist/immunologist will conduct a thorough investigation of all potential causes that include:
MEDICAL HISTORY
Medical history
Your allergist will ask for specific details regarding all past allergic reactions. Clinical history along with allergy testing is used in the identification of allergen triggers.


LABORATORY TESTS
Laboratory tests
Medically supervised allergen challenges may also be undertaken to confirm a diagnosis or determine if a patient has outgrown an allergy. Tests to identify sensitization to an allergen include:

1. Skin prick test (puncture or scratch test):This test inspects for immediate allergic reaction to different allergens at the same time. It is usually performed on the forearm in adults and on the upper back in children.

2.Serum-specific IgE:This test was formerly known as RAST(Radioallergosorbent testing). It measures how much IgE your body makes in response to a single allergen and is preferred when skin prick test (the favored allergy test) is not suitable or not available.

3. Serum enzyme tryptase:Tryptase is released from mast cells during anaphylaxis. The level can be raised for three hours after the reaction. Levels greater than 11.5 ng/mL are considered elevated.

4. SC5b-9 (soluble membrane attack complex (sMAC) or terminal complement complex (TCC)):This test measures the complement system activation which can be elevated shortly after a severe allergic reaction.

Note:Testing for allergen-specific IgE food mixes is not recommended as it does not indicate which foods from the mix the patient is allergic to and may result in unnecessary avoidance of foods.

Get all your labs in the safety and comfort of your homes.
Book Test Now
CELEBS AFFECTED
Celebs affectedBethenny FrankelBethenny Frankel is an American businesswoman, television personality, entrepreneur, philanthropist, and author. Bethenny opened up about a scary incident in 2018 that happened due to her "rare fish allergy." She always carries an Epinephrine injection to manage emergencies.Kerry Marisa WashingtonKerry Marisa Washington is an American actress, producer, and director. She gained wide public recognition for starring as Olivia Pope in the ABC drama series Scandal. She carries Epinephrine injection with her almost everywhere because she has a lot of food allergies.
PREVENTION OF ANAPHYLAXIS
Prevention Of Anaphylaxis

If you have a serious allergy or have experienced anaphylaxis in the past, it's important to try to prevent any future episodes. It can be done by keeping the following things in mind:
IDENTIFY THE TRIGGERS

Identify the triggers
Finding out what you are allergic to, can help you avoid these future episodes of anaphylaxis.
AVOID THOSE TRIGGERS

Avoid those triggers
If a trigger has been identified, you'll need to take steps to avoid it in the future whenever possible. Here are some of the most common triggers and ways to avoid them:

1. Food
Check the food labels for ingredients
Let the staff at a restaurant know what you're allergic to so it's not included in your meal
Remember what types of food may contain small traces of potential allergens

2. Insect stings
Move away from wasps, hornets or bees slowly without panicking
Use an insect repellent if you spend time outdoors, especially in the summer
Be careful drinking out of cans when there are insects around
Do not walk around outside with bare feet

3. Medicines
If you're allergic to certain types of medicines, talk to your doctor to prescribe alternatives that can be safely used.
ALWAYS CARRY ADRENALINE AUTO-INJECTORS

Always carry adrenaline auto-injectors
You may be prescribed an adrenaline auto-injector if there's an ongoing risk you could develop anaphylaxis. Things to keep in mind while using an auto-injector are:
Always carry two in-date auto-injectors at all times
Make sure you and any caregivers know when and how to use your auto-injector
Check the expiry date regularly and replace it before it expires
Do not delay injecting yourself if you think you may be experiencing anaphylaxis
TRY ALLERGY SHOTS (IMMUNOTHERAPY)

Try allergy shots (immunotherapy)
For many people, allergy shots can help lower the risk of anaphylaxis and decrease the severity of reactions.
SPECIALIST TO VISIT
Specialist To Visit

You should contact the emergency department of your nearest hospital if you suffer from an anaphylactic attack. Doctors that can help you with this are:
General physician
Allergist
Immunologist

Anallergistis a medical practitioner specializing in the diagnosis and treatment of allergies.

Animmunologistis a doctor who diagnoses, treats, and works to prevent immune system disorders.

Seek advice from our professionals.
Consult Here

TREATMENT OF ANAPHYLAXIS
Treatment Of Anaphylaxis

The treatment of anaphylaxis depends upon the ability of the patient to describe the situation but if the patient is unconscious or not properly conscious, understanding the symptoms becomes important. Anaphylaxis treatment includes:
MEDICATIONS
Medications
The medications used to treat an anaphylactic reaction include:
Adrenaline(Epinephrine):This is the first line of treatment recommended for patients with anaphylaxis. This drug can be life-saving as it plays an important role in delaying the progression of life-threatening reactions.
Antihistamines:Antihistamines reduce inflammation in air passages and also improve breathing. H1 antihistamines such asdiphenhydramineorcetirizinecan also relieve itching and hives.
Beta antagonist:They are used for airways protection and to relieve respiratory tract symptoms.
Glucocorticoids:Steroids (glucocorticoids) are often recommended in anaphylaxis. They reduce the severity of the acute reaction and the risk of recurrence.
FOR HOSPITAL-BASED PATIENTS
For hospital-based patients
Patients who have been moved to a hospital set up and stabilized, the following agents are used:
Activated charcoal:The solution is commonly used to treat poison victims, and also to treat people with peanut allergies. Drinking activated charcoal immediately after accidental exposure to peanuts can block further absorption of allergy-causing proteins in the body and reduce the severity of the allergic reaction.
Vasopressors:Norepinephrine,vasopressinand other pressors are helpful in patients suffering from anaphylaxis with refractory hypotension (persistent hypotension in resuscitated patients)
Glucagon:It is an anti-hypoglycemic used to manage and treat anaphylaxis refractory to epinephrine, and aid in passing food boluses.
Intravenous fluids:These are administered to maintain adequate blood circulation.
IN CASE OF EMERGENCY
In case of emergency
If you are with someone who is having an allergic reaction with signs of anaphylaxis, here are things you need to do:
Call the local medical emergency number immediately.
See If the person is carrying an epinephrine auto-injector (EpiPen, Auvi-Q, others) to treat an allergic attack.
Help the person inject the medication by pressing the autoinjector against the person's thigh.
Make the person lie face up and be still.
Loosen their tight clothing and cover the person with a blanket.
Turn the person to the side to prevent choking if there's vomiting or bleeding from the mouth.
Position the patient in the Trendelenburg position i.e lying flat on the back with legs elevated in order to allow blood flow to the heart.
If there are no signs of breathing, coughing or movement, begin CPR (start uninterrupted chest presses about 100 every minute).

Correct first aid can help save a life! Know about step-by-step instructions for emergency management.
Read This

COMPLICATIONS OF ANAPHYLAXIS
Complications Of Anaphylaxis

Anaphylactic shock is an extremely serious condition that can block your airways and prevent you from breathing. It can also stop your heart. This is due to the decrease in blood pressure that prevents the heart from receiving enough oxygen. The complications of anaphylaxis include:
Cerebral hypoxia:It refers to a condition in which there is a decrease of oxygen supply to the brain even though there is adequate blood flow.
Acute renal failure:It is associated with anaphylactic shock caused by diclofenac sodium.
Fetal death:There is no evidence that anaphylaxis occurs in the fetus but maternal anaphylaxis can lead to a significant risk of fetal/neonatal neurological damage or even death.
Septic shock:It is caused by malfunction of the vascular system due to severe allergic reactions such as anaphylaxis that results in blood poisoning by bacteria.
Acute respiratory distress syndrome:It is a condition in which fluid collects in the air sacs of the lungs, depriving organs of oxygen.
Abnormal coagulation profile:Anaphylaxis is a complex allergic reaction where multiple biological systems are involved and it can lead to disruption of coagulation systems in severe cases.
Pulmonary edema:Histamines are the substances released by the body during an allergic reaction, that cause the blood vessels to expand, which in turn causes a dangerous drop in blood pressure. Fluid can leak into the lungs, causing swelling (pulmonary edema).
Arrhythmia:Anaphylaxis can also cause heart rhythm disturbances.
Abnormal liver function:The relationship between acute liver injury with idiopathic anaphylaxis is rare, but there are cases involving repeated episodes of anaphylactic shock accompanied by acute liver injury.Did you know?
Food allergy in children may be linked to anxiety. To Know moreRead This
ALTERNATIVE THERAPIES FOR ANAPHYLAXIS
Alternative Therapies For Anaphylaxis

HOMEOPATHY
Homeopathy
Homeopathy works by correcting the immune responses of individuals rather than suppressing or modifying the immune system. Some individuals use homeopathic remedies for allergic reactions or allergic diseases, but there is no research showing effectiveness of homeopathy in preventing or treating anaphylaxis. Anaphylaxis requires emergency medical treatment.
ACUPUNCTURE

Acupuncture
Acupuncture has been used to support the immune system and to relieve symptoms of seasonal allergies. However, acupuncture should not be used to treat anaphylaxis, which requires immediate medical attention.
TRADITIONAL CHINESE MEDICINE (TMC)

Traditional chinese medicine (TMC)
TCM has been used in China and other Asian countries for thousands of years, either as monotherapy or in combination with standard Western medical treatment.Studiessuggest that an herb-based formula (FAHF-2) may be an effective approach to food allergy treatment that is not specific to any one food allergen and can be potentially used to treat multiple food allergies.

Read about how to tackle allergies in a risk-free way.
Click Here

LIVING WITH ANAPHYLAXIS
Living With Anaphylaxis

A number of general strategies and tips may help you or your child avoid anaphylaxis, or improve health outcomes when a reaction happens. Some of them include:
ANAPHYLAXIS EDUCATION

Anaphylaxis education
Awareness of people about anaphylaxis, their family, and caregivers tend to decrease distress and apprehension and instills trust in their capacity to cope, not just by anaphylactic episodes but even by identification and timely treatment.
KEEP A CLOSE WATCH ON THE FOOD INGREDIENTS

Keep a close watch on the food ingredients
If you have a severe food allergy, scan food labels carefully for any troublesome ingredients, which may be harmful.You should also feel free to ask detailed questions about ingredients and food preparation when you’re eating out.
INTRODUCE NEW FOODS TO CHILDREN SLOWLY

Introduce new foods to children slowly
If you or your child have had a severe allergic reaction to a food, it’s more likely that another new food will also cause problems. This might require sensitization, which means that the first few times your child tries out a new food item, give it in small amounts with bites that are spaced out.
ALWAYS WEAR A MEDICAL ID TAG

Always wear a medical ID tag
Having a necklace or bracelet that indicates your anaphylaxis risk can help bystanders and first responders identify what’s happening to you in case of any reaction or emergency.
KEEP ALL POTENTIAL TREATMENTS HANDY

Keep all potential treatments handy
These include an epinephrine auto-injector for nearly everyone, and also possibly a chewable antihistamine and a stiff card to scrape out a bee’s stinger.
NEVER SHARE YOUR EPINEPHRINE

Never share your epinephrine
You shouldn’t use your auto-injector on anyone else unless you know for sure that they are having an anaphylactic reaction. Doing so not only may put you at risk for not having this treatment available for you, but it may cause medical problems in someone who isn’t experiencing anaphylaxis.

Read more about adrenaline injection.
Click HereDid our information help you?In our relentless endeavour to keep improving our services, you are our eyes. Kindly take out sometime to guide us on how to serve your better.Share your feedbackSubscribe to stay informedSubscribe to our carefully crafted informative emailers by Medical Experts and be the first to get the latest health news, tips and important updates.SubmitDisclaimerTata 1mg's sole intention is to ensure that its consumers get information that is expert-reviewed, accurate and trustworthy. However, the information contained herein should NOT be used as a substitute for the advice of a qualified physician. The information provided here is for informational purposes only. This may not cover all possible side effects, drug interactions or warnings or alerts. Please consult your doctor and discuss all your queries related to any disease or medicine. We intend to support, not replace, the doctor-patient relationship.

--- REFERENCES ---

- Gupta, Neeraj & Bang, Akash & Mishra, Nihar. (2022). Anaphylaxis: Indian Academy of Pediatrics Standard Treatment Guidelines 2022.  (https://www.researchgate.net/publication/357601848_Anaphylaxis_Indian_Academy_of_Pediatrics_Standard_Treatment_Guidelines_2022 )
- Khan NU, Shakeel N, Makda A, Mallick AS, Ali Memon M, Hashmi SH, Khan UR, Razzak JA. Anaphylaxis: incidence, presentation, causes and outcome in patients in a tertiary-care hospital in Karachi, Pakistan. QJM. 2013 Dec;106(12):1095-101.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3840329/)
- de Silva et al. Aetiology of anaphylaxis in patients referred to an immunology clinic in Colombo, Sri Lanka. Allergy Asthma Clin Immunol (2018) 14:81.  (https://aacijournal.biomedcentral.com/track/pdf/10.1186/s13223-018-0295-0.pdf)
- SHAKER ET AL. Anaphylaxis—a 2020 practice parameter update, systematic review, and Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) analysis. J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL APRIL 2020.  (https://www.aaaai.org/Aaaai/media/Media-Library-PDFs/Professional%20Education/Podcasts/Anaphylaxis-2020-grade-document.pdf)
- Triggiani M, Patella V, Staiano RI, Granata F, Marone G. Allergy and the cardiovascular system. Clin Exp Immunol. 2008 Sep;153 Suppl 1(Suppl 1):7-11.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2515352/)
- Age-related differences in characteristics of anaphylaxis in Chinese children from infancy to adolescence. World Allergy Organization Journal. Volume 14, Issue 11, November 2021.  (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1939455121000995)
- Turner PJ, Jerschow E, Umasunthar T, Lin R, Campbell DE, Boyle RJ. Fatal Anaphylaxis: Mortality Rate and Risk Factors. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2017 Sep-Oct;5(5):1169-1178.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5589409/)
- Turner PJ, Jerschow E, Umasunthar T, Lin R, Campbell DE, Boyle RJ. Fatal Anaphylaxis: Mortality Rate and Risk Factors. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2017 Sep-Oct;5(5):1169-1178.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5586107/)
- Barg W, Medrala W, Wolanczyk-Medrala A. Exercise-induced anaphylaxis: an update on diagnosis and treatment. Curr Allergy Asthma Rep. 2011 Feb;11(1):45-51.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3020292/)
- Anaphylaxis. ASCIA HP Information Paper: Anaphylaxis. ASCIA 2013.  (http://www.allergy.org.au/images/stories/anaphylaxis/ASCIA_HPIP_Anaphylaxis_2013.pdf)
- Tejas, K & Patel, & Patel, Tejas & Patel, Parvati & Barvaliya, Manish & Tripathi, Chandrabhanu. (2014). Drug-induced anaphylactic reactions in Indian population: A systematic review. Indian Journal of Critical Care Medicine. 18. 796-806. 10.4103/0972-5229.146313.  (https://www.researchgate.net/publication/269114145_Drug-induced_anaphylactic_reactions_in_Indian_population_A_systematic_review)
- Hussain, Md Sadique & ., Mohit. (2021). Anaphylaxis: Life-Threatening Allergic Reaction. International Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences Review and Research. 67. 110-116. 10.47583/ijpsrr.2021.v67i02.019.  (https://www.researchgate.net/publication/351154924_Anaphylaxis_Life-Threatening_Allergic_Reaction )
- Berenguer A, Couto A, Brites V, Fernandes R. Anaphylaxis in pregnancy: a rare cause of neonatal mortality. BMJ Case Rep. 2013 Jan 11;2013:bcr2012007055.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3603634/)
- Wang J. Treatment of food anaphylaxis with traditional Chinese herbal remedies: from mouse model to human clinical trials. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol. 2013 Aug;13(4):386-91  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4276320/)
- The burden of allergic diseases in the Indian subcontinent: barriers and challenges. Vol 8 April 2020.  (https://www.thelancet.com/action/showPdf?pii=S2214-109X%2820%2930061-9)
