https://www.1mg.com/diseases/attention-deficit-hyperactivity-disorder-adhd-102#

ATTENTION DEFICIT HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER (ADHD)
Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)Also known as Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, Attention deficit disorder, ADD, and Childhood hyperkinesis
OVERVIEW
Overview
ADHD is a mental health condition characterized by hyperactivity, impulsivity, and attention deficits. Signs typically emerge in early life and commonly involve inattentiveness, lack of concentration, disorganization, trouble finishing tasks, forgetfulness, and misplacing belongings.


Children between the ages of 3 and 12 years are more prone to ADHD. Although ADHD is considered a disease of childhood, adults can also have ADHD. Around 2/3 of children with ADHD might retain their symptoms even when they grow up.


Low birth weight, positive family history, exposure to contaminants during pregnancy, and neonatal diseases are known to increase the risk of getting ADHD.


ADHD can hurt academic and professional achievements, interpersonal relationships, and daily functioning. There is no cure for ADHD, but successful management and improvement of some symptoms is possible as the child gets older.


The primary treatment involves behavioral therapy. It aims to enhance positive behaviors and eliminate unwanted or problematic behaviors. Medications are also used to control symptoms.
KEY FACTS
Key FactsUsually seen inChildren between the age of 3 to 12 yearsGender affectedBoth men and womenBody part(s) involvedBrainMimicking ConditionsDepressionAnxietyHearing disordersLearning disordersDevelopmental disordersNecessary health tests/imagingClinical examinationTreatmentBehavioral therapy: Parent training , behavior therapy with children, Behavioral interventions in the classroom, Peer interventions & Organizational skill trainingMedications:Methylphenidates,Atomoxetine,Bupropion&ClonidineSpecialists to consultGeneral physicianPsychiatristPediatricianPhysical therapistBehavioral therapistCounselors
SYMPTOMS OF ADHD
Symptoms Of ADHD

Symptoms of ADHD are most commonly observed in school-aged children. Children with ADHD often experience an ongoing pattern of the following types of symptoms:
1. INATTENTION
1. Inattention
It includes symptoms that develop due to a lack of focus and organization.
2. HYPERACTIVITY
2. Hyperactivity
Children with ADHD are hyperactive, i.e., in constant movement even when it is not appropriate.
3. IMPULSIVITY
3. Impulsivity
Children with ADHD show impulsive behavior which includes taking action without thinking. These children have a hidden desire for immediate rewards.

Children with ADHD show impulsive behavior, including taking action without thinking. They also have a hidden desire for immediate rewards.
Some common signs and symptoms of all these three behaviors are:
Having difficulty sustaining attention during play or tasks, such as conversations, lectures, or lengthy reading
Taking unnecessary risks
Having a hard time resisting temptation
Having trouble taking turns
Having difficulty getting along with others
Finding it hard to follow through on instructions
Having difficulty organizing tasks and activities
Avoiding tasks that require sustained mental effort
Daydreaming
Forgetting things
Squirming
Excessive talking
Make careless mistakes
Interestingly, boys and girls are much more likely to express a different set of symptoms.
SYMPTOMS IN BOYS
Symptoms in boys
The externalized symptoms commonly associated with ADHD behavior are more widely seen in boys. Due to this, boys have a much higher chance of being diagnosed with ADHD. The set of symptoms includes:
Impulsivity or acting out
Running
Hitting
Lack of focus
Physical aggression
SYMPTOMS IN GIRLS
Symptoms in girls
Most of the girls with ADHD may remain unidentified. This is due to the differences in the expression of the disorder among boys and girls. Females with ADHD are reported to have fewer hyperactive/impulsive symptoms and more inattentive symptoms when compared with males with ADHD.  These symptoms aren't as apparent as they are in boys and include:
Being withdrawn
Low self-esteem
Anxiety
Intellectual impairment
Difficulty with academic achievement
Tendency to “daydream”
Verbal aggression (teasing, taunting, or name-calling)

QUICK BYTE!
Quick byte!
Although not exclusively specific to ADHD, many children with this condition can also experienceinsomnia(trouble falling and staying asleep). In addition to insomnia, kids with ADHD can also struggle with low sleep quality, daytime drowsiness, andsleep apnea(sleep disorder in which breathing repeatedly stops and starts during sleep).


SYMPTOMS IN ADULTS
Symptoms in adults
Although ADHD is considered a disease of childhood, it is estimated that 2%-6% of adults also have ADHD. Around 2/3 of children with ADHD retain their symptoms even when they grow up.
Adults with ADHD usually demonstrate hyperactive symptoms, such as feeling internally restless and fidgety. They also often find it difficult to:
Manage their attention
Complete lengthy tasks unless interesting
Stay organized
Control their behavior
CAUSES OF ADHD
Causes Of ADHD

The exact cause of ADHD is not known. However, the role of some of the parts of the brain is recently established in ADHD. These parts are smaller and less active in people with ADHD.
The altered function of these parts may be responsible for various associated symptoms as these parts offer tasks like:
Coordinating sensory input with emotions
Regulating aggressive behavior
Communicating with ease
Expressing
Taking decisions
Planning
These changes can be triggered by various “risk factors” discussed in the next section.
RISK FACTORS FOR ADHD
Risk Factors For ADHD

ADHD can be influenced by personal, familial, and social factors similar to other mental conditions. The associated risk factors are:
1. AGE
1. Age
Children between the ages of 3 and 12 years are more prone to ADHD. In India, about 7% of school-going children are diagnosed with ADHD.
2. FAMILY HISTORY
2. Family history
Siblings of the children with ADHD are at increased risk of the disorder. Family studies have identified a 2- to 8-fold increase in the risk for ADHD in parents and siblings of children with ADHD.
Also, twins are more likely to have ADHD than singletons.
3. FACTORS AFFECTING EXPECTANT MOTHERS
3. Factors affecting expectant mothers
Children born to women exposed to following contaminants/drugs are more prone to ADHD:
Lead
Cigarette smoke
Alcohol
Medications such as corticosteroids and antidepressants
Certain food additives
Also, the following conditions  in the expectant mother might increase the chance of ADHD in their child:
Stress
Mental conditions
High blood pressure
Hyperthyroidism


Get your thyroid levels checked.
Book Tests

4. PREMATURE DELIVERY
4. Premature delivery
Babies born a few weeks early (before 37) are at increased risk of developing ADHD in later life.
5. LOW BIRTH WEIGHT
5. Low birth weight
Studies suggest that children having lower weight at the time of birth have more chances of developing ADHD in later life. This can be attributed to compromised development of the nervous system.
6. NEONATAL DISEASES
6. Neonatal diseases
Children born with the following conditions are more susceptible to developing ADHD:
Hypoglycemia
Kidney conditions
Liver conditions
Human immunodeficiency infection
7. MEDICAL CONDITIONS
7. Medical conditions
Individuals with certain medical conditions are more prone to ADHD. Such conditions include:
Seizures
Asthma
Gastrointestinal disorders such as celiac disease and gluten sensitivityDid you know?
Parent-child relationships can also affect the development of ADHD in children.
Here are 5 tips to build a strong connection with your child.Tap To Know
DIAGNOSIS OF ADHD
Diagnosis Of ADHD

The diagnosis of ADHD is made through:
1. RULING OUT OTHER CONDITIONS
1. Ruling out other conditions
ADHD exhibits a similar set of symptoms to various other learning disabilities and mental disorders, such as:
Depression
Bipolar disorder
Anxiety
Obsessive-compulsive disorder
Therefore, it is essential to rule out these medical conditions through laboratory and imaging tests, such as X-rays or brain scans.
Sometimes, the symptoms can be a side effect of various medications, usually checked through blood tests.


2. CLINICAL EXAMINATION
2. Clinical examination
ADHD is diagnosed through symptoms and does not have any specific tests.
Healthcare providers rely on the crucial guidelines outlined in the American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic and Statistical Manual, Fifth Edition (DSM-5)1, to ensure a standardized and accurate diagnosis of ADHD. DSM-5 provides a list of inattentive and hyperactivity/impulsivity symptoms.
ADHD is confirmed by the presence of at least 6 symptoms for children up to age 16 years
Individuals above 17 years of age should present with at least 5 symptoms to be called people living with ADHD.
Symptoms should be present in multiple settings, such as at school, work, or home.
Symptoms should cause significant impairment in social, occupational, and academic functioning.
QUICK BYTE!
Quick byte!
Younger kids in the same class are more likely to be wrongly diagnosed with ADHD because a few months can affect their ability to focus and behave.


LIST OF SYMPTOMS AS PER DSM-5
List of symptoms as per DSM-5
Inattention
Making careless mistakes
Failure to give close attention
Failure to listen when spoken directly
Not able to follow instructions
Trouble organizing tasks
It avoids tasks that require mental effort.
Often loses things necessary for tasks and activities (e.g., school materials, pencils, books, tools, wallets, keys, paperwork, eyeglasses, mobile telephones).
Easily distracted
Forget even basic things.


Hyperactivity/impulsivity
Keep moving the body
Leaving seat in situations when remaining seated is expected
Runs about or climbs in inappropriate situations
Unable to play or take part in leisure activities quietly.
Always “on the go,” acting as if “driven by a motor.”
Talking excessively
Blurting out an answer before a question has been completed
Trouble waiting their turn
Interrupting others


Note:These symptoms are presented just for your information. Only a trained healthcare provider can diagnose or treat ADHD.
CELEBS AFFECTED
Celebs affectedMichael Phelps
Michael Phelps, the well-known American former competitive swimmer, has talked about ADHD several times. He credited his condition as a source of motivation to win the Olympics. He is now helping other children with ADHD and other learning disabilities through his foundation.
PREVENTION OF ADHD
Prevention Of ADHD

ADHD cannot be prevented. However, the risk can be attenuated through the following ways:
1. TAKE CAUTION DURING PREGNANCY
1. Take caution during pregnancy
The exposure to certain contaminants/drugs during pregnancy increases the risk of ADHD in their developing child. Pregnant women should avoid:
Smoking
Alcohol
Exposure to contaminants such as lead and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs)
The use of certain medications, such as corticosteroids and antihypertensives, is associated with an increased risk of ADHD in children. It is also advisable to consult with your doctor before taking any medications during pregnancy.


2. PROTECT YOUR CHILD FROM TOXINS
2. Protect your child from toxins
Children should be prevented from exposure to pollutants and toxins as it increases the likelihood of developing ADHD. The specific toxins from which the children should be strictly protected include:
Cigarette smoke
Agricultural or industrial chemicals
Lead paint (found in some old buildings)


3. LIMIT SCREEN TIME
3. Limit screen time
While not proven, it might be wise for kids to limit TV and video game time in the first five years.
Apart from these, the following measures might help reduce the complications in the ADHD child:
Make a routine of daily activities such as wake-up time, meal-time, reading, and playing
Give full attention to your child while giving the instructions
Be in touch with your child’s teachers and caregivers to get a complete understanding of their overall behavior
SPECIALIST TO VISIT
Specialist To Visit

It is essential to implement an integrated healthcare plan for the diagnosis and treatment of ADHD to achieve long-term treatment goals. The specialist doctors that may help in the diagnosis and overall care include:
General Physician
Psychiatrist
Pediatrician
Physical therapist
Behavioral therapist
Counselor

General practitionershelp assess the symptoms and diagnose the syndrome. They can also direct patients to specialists for further consultation.


Psychiatristhelps in confirming ADHD through several psychological tests.


Pediatricianshelp in diagnosing and managing the condition in infants and,


Physical therapistsdesign activities to build strength and motor skills and to improve muscle control, posture, and balance.


Behavioral therapistsare responsible for teaching specific social skills, such as developing conversation skills in children.


A counselorhelps in self-acceptance, which further aids in reducing anxiety.

To get the right diagnosis, it is important to consult the right doctor. Consult India’s best doctors online.
Consult Now

TREATMENT OF ADHD
Treatment Of ADHD

The lives of people living with ADHD can be drastically improved through accurate diagnosis and effective treatment.
The type of treatment depends upon the age of the patient. The various treatment options include:

A. BEHAVIORAL THERAPY
A. Behavioral therapy
Behavior management is the first line of treatment for children younger than six years of age. The recommendations for children aged six and older involve combining medication and behavior therapy.
Behavior therapy aims to strengthen positive behaviors and eliminate unwanted or problematic behaviors. It is often helpful to start behavior therapy as soon as a diagnosis is made.
It includes:
Parent training
Behavior therapy with children
Behavioral interventions in the classroom
Peer interventions
Organizational skill training

B. MEDICATIONS
B. Medications
Medications are also used to control ADHD symptoms in daily life. It includes:

1. Stimulants:They are the mainstay drug category used in ADHD. Common examples include amphetamines andmethylphenidates.

2. Nonstimulants:Children who cannot tolerate stimulants or haveanxietyare usually prescribed nonstimulants. It includes:
Antidepressants (Atomoxetine,Bupropion)
Alpha agonist (Clonidine, Guanfacine)

QUICK BYTE!
Quick Byte!
A technique called a trigeminal nerve stimulation system has shown promise for managing ADHD. The device delivers mild stimulation to trigeminal nerve branches, suppressing hyperactivity.
HOME-CARE FOR ADHD
Home-care For ADHD

Here are a few important points the people with ADHD should follow:
A. MAKE DIETARY ALTERATIONS
A. Make dietary alterations
While diet is not directly associated with decreasing the symptoms of ADHD, eating a balanced diet of fresh and wholesome food helps maintain overall health.
Here is a list of foods that people with ADHD can add to their diet:
1.Apple:People with ADHD should increase their intake of complex carbohydrates. Apple is a rich source of complex carbohydrates. One can also pick pears as an alternative. Eating these types of foods just before bedtime may help people with ADHD to sleep better.
2. Fatty fish:Omega-3 fatty acids have been known to significantly decrease ADHD symptoms in children and adults. Cold-water fatty fish, such as salmon, mackerel, tuna, herring, and sardines are an excellent source of Omega-3 fatty acids. They can be used to make wraps, sandwiches, pasta, and salads.

One can also augment the diet with Omega and fish oil supplements.
Add to Cart
3. Nuts:Walnuts(akhrot),almonds (badam), andcashews (kaju)are also rich sources of omega-3 fatty acids, vitamins, and minerals.
4. Leafy Greens:People with ADHD should include green leafy vegetables likespinach (paalak)in their diet. Spinach can be cooked or blended with berries or fruit into a smoothie.


Here are 5 amazing benefits of spinach.
Read Now
5.Orange (Santra):Oranges help people with ADHD symptoms sleep well. You can have them in a fruit salad or pick orange juice. Rich in vitamin C, oranges can be an excellent addition to your fruit bowl.

QUICK BYTE!
Quick Byte!
Foods rich in proteins such as poultry, fish, eggs, beans, nuts, soya and low-fat dairy products – can benefit people with ADHD symptoms. A diet rich in proteins helps to release chemicals that mediate the communication between the brain cells. Proteins also help to prevent the spikes in the blood sugar levels that increase hyperactivity.


AVOID CERTAIN FOODS
Avoid certain foods
Studies indicate that additives like sodium benzoate, food colorings, and preservatives could potentially worsen symptoms of ADHD. Foods with these colorings and preservatives should be limited or avoided. Such foods include:
Carbonated beverages
Salad dressings
Fruit juice products
Breadcrumbs
Candies
Icing
Soft drinks
Pickles
Ice creams


B. EXERCISE REGULARLY
B. Exercise regularly
Regular exercise has been shown to reduce symptoms of ADHD. The following forms of exercise can be done:
Running
Walking briskly
Biking
Swimming laps
Dance
Gymnastics
Yoga
Strength training
Squats
Pushups
Pullups
Weightlifting
Remember, your health is our priority. Before embarking on any exercise program, it's crucial to have a conversation with your doctor. They can guide you on how much you can handle, taking into account your age and health condition.

C. MAINTAIN A SLEEP SCHEDULE
C. Maintain a sleep schedule
People with ADHD may suffer from sleep problems. Here are a few tips that might help them get a good night's sleep.
Stick to a proper sleep schedule to regulate the body's internal clock.
Minimize screen time before bedtime.
Avoid the intake of caffeine, like tea or coffee, especially in the late evening and night
Opt for a balanced light dinner to avoid indigestion and discomfort that hamper the sleep cycle.
Engage in regular physical activities. However, try to wind up your workout session at least 2 hours before bedtime.

Trouble sleeping? Explore our sleeping aids.
Shop Now

COMPLICATIONS OF ADHD
Complications Of ADHD

Several complications have been identified with ADHD, including the following:
Academic issues and failure
Accidents due to their impulsive nature and constant need for movement.
Low self-esteem
Alcohol and drug abuse
Learning disabilities
Depression
Anxiety
Oppositional defiant disorder (a mental disorder characterized by frequent anger)
Mania
Tourette syndrome ( sudden twitches, movements, or sounds that people do repeatedly)
ALTERNATIVE THERAPIES FOR ADHD
Alternative Therapies For ADHD

The following therapies can support the conventional treatment and help improve the symptoms of ADHD:
1. CALMING TECHNIQUES
1. Calming techniques
The calming techniques help subside various symptoms by improving overall mental well-being. The various calming techniques that can be adopted include:
Mindfulness meditation
Breathing exercises
Journaling for mental health
Yoga or Tai Chi
Daily medication and daily yoga practice are found to have positive effects on anxiety, hyperactivity, and social issues.

Here are 5 easy yoga poses for beginners.
Read Along

2. COGNITIVE BEHAVIORAL THERAPY
2. Cognitive behavioral therapy
Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is a talking therapy that helps manage problems by changing one's thinking. It allows individuals to cope better with the factors that trigger symptoms of ADHD. It also improves a sense of control over behavior.
3. SELF MASSAGE
3. Self massage
Rubbing the neck, scalp, and skin behind the ear is a beautiful relaxation method. It makes an individual feel pampered and reduces negative thoughts. Practicing this after a stressful day is found to be associated with lesser symptoms of ADHD.
4. FAMILY AND MARITAL THERAPY
4. Family and marital therapy
This provides guidance on managing disruptive behaviors within families and relationships. It also encourages behavior changes and improves interactions with people with ADHD.
5. PARENTING SKILLS TRAINING
5. Parenting skills training
It involves skill training for parents to encourage and reward positive behaviors in their children. Parents are educated on using a system of rewards and consequences to alter a child's behavior.
LIVING WITH ADHD
Living With ADHD

Living with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) can be challenging, as the symptoms can complicate daily tasks. It can make everyday activities exhausting and stressful. Getting the required support to comprehend and handle your child's condition is vital.
The following measures help make life easy and improve overall quality of life.
1. KEEP YOURSELF EDUCATED
1. Keep yourself educated
People with ADHD and parents of children with ADHD should educate themselves about the condition.
2. STAY IN TOUCH WITH THE HEALTHCARE PROVIDER
2. Stay in touch with the healthcare provider
Patients and parents need to stay in constant touch with their healthcare providers. Open communication between the two is essential, as it helps to trace progress.
Regular follow-up is also essential to check the symptoms and associated comorbidities such as depression. Ongoing interaction between the primary caregiver and the family is also crucial for optimizing the medication treatment.
3. AVOID POTENTIAL ALLERGENS
3. Avoid potential allergens
Possible allergens can trigger ADHD symptoms in some cases. Diets that restrict possible allergens may help improve behavior in ADHD.
4. SPEND TIME OUTSIDE
4. Spend time outside
Spending time outside has been associated with a positive effect on behavior. Dedicate some time to walking outdoors, especially in the greenery. Studies have shown that spending even 20 minutes outdoors can have a positive impact on overall health status.


TIPS FOR PARENTS
Tips for parents
The following tips can assist parents in effectively managing their children with ADHD and improving their overall performance.
Give medicines on time and keep them out of reach of children.
Discuss ADHD openly and supportively with your child.
Stay updated about ADHD symptoms and treatment. You can do this by joining online platforms, staying in touch with the doctor, and joining support groups.
Focus on your child's strengths and positive qualities.
Encourage the child to keep their things (school bags, clothes, and toys) organized.
Limit screen time.
Break down complicated tasks into more straightforward and shorter steps.
Use goals and praise or other rewards to keep the child motivated.
Manage the discipline by giving directions politely instead of scolding, yelling, or spanking.
Provide a healthy lifestyle to the child by giving them nutritious food, keeping them engaged in physical activity, and ensuring sufficient sleep.

ADDRESSING WORKPLACE ISSUES IN ADULTS
Addressing workplace issues in adults
Adults also need better communication skills, distractibility, procrastination, and difficulty managing complex projects. The following measures might help in solving these problems:
Try to minimize distractibility by using "white noise" earphones, working in unused space, jotting down ideas in a notebook, keeping a list of ideas, and performing one task at a time
Temper outbursts can be effectively managed through self-talk to monitor impulsive actions, working with a coach, asking for regular, constructive feedback, and practicing relaxation and meditation techniques
Take intermittent breaks, take notes in meetings, move around, exercise, take a walk, or run up and down the stairs between work.Did our information help you?In our relentless endeavour to keep improving our services, you are our eyes. Kindly take out sometime to guide us on how to serve your better.Share your feedbackSubscribe to stay informedSubscribe to our carefully crafted informative emailers by Medical Experts and be the first to get the latest health news, tips and important updates.SubmitDisclaimerTata 1mg's sole intention is to ensure that its consumers get information that is expert-reviewed, accurate and trustworthy. However, the information contained herein should NOT be used as a substitute for the advice of a qualified physician. The information provided here is for informational purposes only. This may not cover all possible side effects, drug interactions or warnings or alerts. Please consult your doctor and discuss all your queries related to any disease or medicine. We intend to support, not replace, the doctor-patient relationship.

--- REFERENCES ---

- Hertrich I, Dietrich S, Blum C, Ackermann H. The Role of the Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex for Speech and Language Processing. Front Hum Neurosci. 2021 May 17;15:645209. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2021.645209. PMID: 34079444; PMCID: PMC8165195.  (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34079444/)
- Apps MA, Rushworth MF, Chang SW. The Anterior Cingulate Gyrus and Social Cognition: Tracking the Motivation of Others. Neuron. 2016 May 18;90(4):692-707. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2016.04.018. PMID: 27196973; PMCID: PMC4885021.  (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27196973/)
- Soheilipour F, Shiri S, Ahmadkhani HR, Abdollahi E, Hosseini-Baharanchi FS. Risk factors for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: a case-control study in 5 to 12 years old children. Med Pharm Rep. 2020 Apr;93(2):175-180. doi: 10.15386/mpr-1407. Epub 2020 Apr 22. PMID: 32478324; PMCID: PMC7243883.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7243883/)
- Banerjee TD, Middleton F, Faraone SV. Environmental risk factors for attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder. Acta Paediatr. 2007 Sep;96(9):1269-74. doi: 10.1111/j.1651-2227.2007.00430.x. PMID: 17718779.  (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17718779/)
- Salari, N., Ghasemi, H., Abdoli, N. et al. The global prevalence of ADHD in children and adolescents: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ital J Pediatr 49, 48 (2023).  (https://ijponline.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13052-023-01456-1#citeas)
- Magnus W, Nazir S, Anilkumar AC, et al. Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder. [Updated 2023 Aug 8]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2024 Jan.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK441838/)
- Attention-Deficit / Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), Center For Disease Control and Prevention, Last Updated On: October 16, 2023.  (https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/adhd/index.html)
- Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder, Mental Health Information, National Institute of Mental Health, Last Updated On: September 2023.  (https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/attention-deficit-hyperactivity-disorder-adhd)
- What is ADHD? American Psychiatric Association, Last Updated On: June 2022.  (https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/attention-deficit-hyperactivity-disorder-adhd)
- ADHD across the lifetime, Attention-Deficit / Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), Center For Diseases Control and Prevention. Last Updated On: October 11, 2023.  (https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/adhd/features/adhd-across-the-lifetime.html)
- Hoseini BL, Ajilian M, TAGHIZADE MH, Khademi G, Saeidi M. Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in children: A short review and literature.  (https://www.researchgate.net/publication/269405145_Attention_Deficit_Hyperactivity_Disorder_ADHD_in_Children_A_Short_Review_and_Literature)
- Williams OC, Prasad S, McCrary A, Jordan E, Sachdeva V, Deva S, Kumar H, Mehta J, Neupane P, Gupta A. Adult attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: a comprehensive review. Annals of Medicine and Surgery. 2023 May 1;85(5):1802-10.  (https://journals.lww.com/annals-of-medicine-and-surgery/fulltext/2023/05000/Adult_attention_deficit_hyperactivity_disorder__a.74.aspx)
- Lange KW, Lange KM, Nakamura Y, Reissmann A. Nutrition in the management of ADHD: A review of recent research. Current Nutrition Reports. 2023 Sep;12(3):383-94.  (https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s13668-023-00487-8)
