https://www.1mg.com/diseases/bed-wetting-127#

BED-WETTING
Bed-wettingAlso known as nighttime incontinence and nocturnal enuresis
OVERVIEW
Overview
Bedwetting refers to the loss of urine during sleep at least twice a week in children older than 5 years of age for at least 3 months.

The risk factors include having a positive family history, excessive intake of fluids before bedtime, improper sleep routine, and certain health conditions such as constipation.

The primary treatment approach is behavioral therapy, which consists of certain lifestyle changes, such as limiting fluid intake 1-2 hours before bedtime, avoiding caffeinated beverages, and timely voiding every 3 to 4 hours. Other treatment options include enuresis alarms and medications.

Bedwetting can have both physical and emotional impacts on a child’s life. It creates a frustrating and embarrassing condition for a grown-up child. These children may suffer from poor self-esteem. Giving reassurance and proper education can help reduce the emotional burden of the disease.
KEY FACTS
Key FactsUsually seen inChildren above 5 years of ageGender affectedBoth boys and girls but more common in boysBody part(s) involvedUrinary systemMimicking ConditionsBladder dysfunction from infection or neurological conditionsIncontinence due to anatomical abnormalitiesPolyuria secondary to diabetes mellitus, diabetes insipidus, excessive fluid or diuretic intake, or medicationsNecessary health tests/imagingMedical history and clinical examinationPhysical examinationUrine routine and microscopyImaging studies:Renal ultrasound,KUB ultrasound, andSpine MRITreatmentBehavioral therapyEnuresis alarmsMedications:Desmopressin,Oxybutynin,Polyethylene glycol&ImipramineSpecialists to consultGeneral physicianPediatric urologistPediatrician
SYMPTOMS OF BEDWETTING
Symptoms Of Bedwetting

The main symptom of bedwetting is involuntary urination during sleep. It is considered a medical condition only when it occurs at least twice a week in children older than 5 years of age for at least 3 months.


The presence of more than “four” episodes of urination in “a week” is termed as “frequent.”


Individuals having lower urinary tract dysfunction may experience the following additional symptoms:
Pain in the lower urinary tract
Increased frequency of urination (≥8 times/day)
Repeated leakage of urine, even during daytime
A sudden and immediate urge to urinate
Pain while urinating
Straining (application of pressure at the abdomen while urinating)
CAUSES OF BEDWETTING
Causes Of Bedwetting

The different proposed theories behind bedwetting are:
1. INCREASED URINE PRODUCTION AT NIGHT
1. Increased urine production at night
Typically, the production of urine diminishes at night due to the increased production of a hormone known as ADH (antidiuretic hormone), a natural process in the body.
Some studies have shown that decreased nocturnal ADH production at night might contribute to bedwetting.
2. BLADDER OVERACTIVITY
2. Bladder overactivity
The bladder's fullness causes contraction of the muscles, which leads to emptying. Any defect in these muscles can cause bedwetting. Children with bladder overactivity usually also have daytime symptoms such as urgency of urination.
3. ROLE OF CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
3. Role of central nervous system
Sleep cycle and urination are both controlled by the brain. Several studies have found some people have frequent arousals with inability to awaken completely. This causes the bladder brain dysfunction which can lead to bedwetting.Did you know?
x-tinymce/htmlMost children eventually stop wetting the bed as they grow up, usually by age 12. Most cases are nothing to be concerned about; they need additional affection and support.
RISK FACTORS FOR BEDWETTING
Risk Factors For Bedwetting

1. AGE
1. Age
Bedwetting is mostly observed in children.
2. GENDER
2. Gender
Bedwetting is more common in boys when compared to girls. Boys also have also been found to have more severe bedwetting than girls.
3. FAMILY HISTORY
3. Family history
Children with one affected parent have a higher chance of developing bedwetting. This risk increases further if both parents suffer from the condition.
4. FLUID INTAKE AT BEDTIME
4. Fluid intake at bedtime
Excessive intake of certain foods and drinks is associated with increased urine production at night. Some children are more sensitive to this intake. However, this can be easily prevented by avoiding fluid intake before 1-2 hours of going to sleep.
5. SLEEP FLUCTUATIONS
5. Sleep fluctuations
Deep sleepers or children with excessive daytime sleepiness are more prone to bedwetting.
6. PSYCHOLOGICAL OR BEHAVIORAL DISORDERS
6. Psychological or behavioral disorders
The following psychological or behavioral disorders can increase the risk of bedwetting:
Attention deficit and hyperactivity disorder
Autismspectrum disorder
Oppositional defiant disorder
Mood disorders
These disorders cause bedwetting due to associated disturbed sleep patterns.
7. NON-PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDERS
7. Non-psychological disorders
Some non-psychological conditions can also contribute to bedwetting through different mechanisms. Examples include:
Constipation
Obstruction in the urinary system
Ectopic ureter (a ureter that does not connect properly to the bladder)
Urinary tract infections
Cystitis (infection of the urinary bladder)
Small bladder capacity
Overactive bladder
Kidney disorders
Sickle cell anemia
Sleep apnea
Diabetes Mellitus
Diabetes insipidus
Anxiety
Stress

Here are some common triggers of childhood stress and the role of parents in managing that.
Tap to Know

DIAGNOSIS OF BEDWETTING
Diagnosis Of Bedwetting

The diagnosis of bedwetting involves a series of steps based on the presence of other symptoms.


1. MEDICAL HISTORY AND CLINICAL EXAMINATION
1. Medical history and clinical examination
Obtaining the history and tracking the symptoms are the most important for all children who present with bedwetting. The essential aspects that are considered include:
Determining the pattern of bedwetting episodes in one night and the number of nights per week
Asking about the intake of caffeine or other fluids before going to bed
Determination of the amount of urine
Raising questions regarding increased thirst, difficulty in urination, urgency, frequency, daytime incontinence, abnormal urinary stream, and constipation
Obtaining a family history of involuntary urination
Determining history of recurrent urinary tract infections
Asking about sleep disorders, snoring, or a diagnosis of sleep-disordered breathing
Knowing about the use of chronic medications
Screening for psychological or behavioral disturbances, including attention deficit and hyperactivity disorder and learning disabilities
Finding out stressor
2. PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
2. Physical examination
In some cases, bedwetting can be due to spinal malformations. A back examination can rule these disorders out. Dimples and hairy patches over the back are signs of a disturbed spine at birth.
3.URINE ROUTINE AND MICROSCOPY
3.Urine routine and microscopy
A complete urinalysis is the only preferred test in children without other symptoms. The urine is tested for the presence of:
Urinary tract infections
Glycosuria (glucose in urine)
Proteinuria (protein in urine)
Hematuria ((blood in urine)
In various cases, blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine tests are also performed to assess kidney function.
4. IMAGING STUDIES
4. Imaging studies
These tests are usually recommended in children who present with multiple other symptoms also, along with bedwetting. It includes:
Kidney ultrasound (to look for kidney damage)
KUB ultrasound( to assess the assesses the condition of your kidneys, ureters, and urinary bladder)
Spine MRI(to check for spinal malformations)

Are you looking for a trusted lab to get your tests done? Get tested with Tata 1mg labs for accurate and on-time results.
Book Now

PREVENTION OF BEDWETTING
Prevention Of Bedwetting


There is no sure shot way to prevent bedwetting. However, several factors that act as a trigger for bedwetting can be minimized by some lifestyle modifications. These include:
1. INCULCATE HEALTHIER EATING HABITS IN YOUR CHILD
1. Inculcate healthier eating habits in your child
Healthy eating habits help in the prevention ofobesityanddiabetes, which act as a trigger for developing bedwetting. The following eating habits should be followed:
Limit spicy foods, chocolate, artificial sweeteners, and caffeinated beverages as they may cause irritation and inflammation of the bladder.
To avoid constipation, include high-fiber foods such as whole-grain cereals (such as porridge, brown rice, wholemeal pasta, wholemeal bread, or pulses such as lentils and beans). Aim for at least 25-30 gms of fiber each day.
Make them eat fruits and vegetables to keep the process of defecation easy.


Is your child a fussy eater? Here is what you should do!
Read Now
2. KEEP YOUR CHILD HYDRATED

2. Keep your child hydrated
The lesser intake of water is also associated with constipation and bladder irritation. This can act as a risk factor for developing bedwetting. To prevent dehydration:
Make them drink at least 6 to 8 glasses of water every day
Make a habit of frequently sipping water even when they are not feeling thirsty

Quick byte
The color of the urine helps identify whether the person is drinking an adequate amount of water. A pale yellow urine indicates that the person is adequately hydrated, while a dark yellow urine indicates dehydration.


3. FOLLOW GOOD TOILET HABITS
3. Follow good toilet habits
Bedwetting can be prevented by teaching good toilet habits to your child, which includes:
Avoiding holding urine for a long period
Taking sufficient time to empty the bladder fully
Sitting in the full crouching squat position while urinating
Going to the toilet when the bladder is full
Using correct posture while passing urine, which involves an upright sitting with elevated feet
SPECIALIST TO VISIT
Specialist To Visit

It is believed that bedwetting resolves independently as the child ages. This is somewhat true, but it can be treated and managed in several ways. The problem of bedwetting should not be ignored.


Some of the specialists that can help diagnose and treat bedwetting include:
General Physician
Pediatric urologist
Pediatrician

A general physician will examine your symptoms and initiate treatment.


A pediatrician can be consulted for medical treatment and preventive healthcare services for children and adolescents.


A pediatric urologist is a doctor who specializes in diagnosing and treating diseases of the urinary system in children.


Consult India’s best doctors online with a single click.
Consult Now

TREATMENT OF BEDWETTING
Treatment Of Bedwetting

THE GOAL OF TREATMENT OF BED WETTING INCLUDES:
The goal of treatment of bed wetting includes:
Reducing the total number of enuretic night
Avoiding enuresis on specific nights in specific locations
Mitigating the stress of the child
Avoiding the recurrence


TREATMENT OPTIONS FOR MONOSYMPTOMATIC BEDWETTING INCLUDE:
Treatment options for monosymptomatic bedwetting include:
1. BEHAVIORAL THERAPY
1. Behavioral therapy
In this, children are educated about bedwetting. They are also advised to make specific lifestyle changes, such as limiting fluid intake 1-2 hours before bedtime and timed voiding every 3 to 4 hours.
2. ENURESIS ALARMS
2. Enuresis alarms
Enuresis alarms are used if behavioral therapy is ineffective. These electronic devices are designed to awaken the child during urination.
The devices are worn or placed in bed. The device produces a loud noise when it senses an episode of urination. They are proven even more effective than some medications in children with good learning capacity.
3. MEDICATIONS
3. Medications
Desmopressin:It is a synthetic analog of the antidiuretic hormone. It works by decreasing the urine output of the kidneys.
Oxybutynin:Oxybutynin works by relaxing the bladder's smooth muscle. They are mainly shown to be effective in children with an overactive bladder.
Polyethylene glycol:It is a stool softener that helps resolve nighttime bedwetting, even in children without constipation.
Imipramine:It is an antidepressant that also decreases the episodes of bedwetting through multiple mechanisms. It is mainly used as the second and third line of treatment.
HOME-CARE FOR BEDWETTING
Home-care For Bedwetting

1. ADJUST THE INTAKE OF FLUIDS
1. Adjust the intake of fluids
Children should be trained for the intake of fluids. Some specific adjustments surely help in bringing down the episodes of bedwetting. These include:
Avoiding soda and caffeinated beverages such as tea and coffee
Keeping the child hydrated
Having 2/3rd of the fluids during the morning to early afternoon and then the other 1/3rd the remainder of the day
Avoiding the consumption of any fluid before 1-2 hours of going to bed
2. PRACTICE TIMED VOIDING
2. Practice timed voiding
Practice going to the bathroom regularly instead of waiting for the urge to go. This will prevent the bladder from overfilling and thus reduce the chances of bedwetting. Inculcate a habit of going to the washroom once every 3-4 hours in your child.
3. EMPTY BLADDER BEFORE BEDTIME
3. Empty bladder before bedtime
It is very important  to empty the bladder right before bedtime. This helps in reducing the episode of bedwetting to a greater extent.
4. IMPROVE SLEEP HYGIENE
4. Improve sleep hygiene
Maintaining a sleep routine helps improve the symptoms of several sleep-related disorders, including bedwetting. It also helps improve nocturnal bladder control.

Here are 8 effective ways to improve the child’s sleeping habits.
Read Now
5. MAINTAIN A DIARY
5. Maintain a diary
The parents should maintain a journal for a few days to record the following activities:
Any leakage of urine during the daytime
Frequency of bedwetting
Ability to reach washroom on time
Conditions that trigger bedwetting
COMPLICATIONS OF BEDWETTING
Complications Of Bedwetting

Bedwetting negatively impacts the quality of life of both child and family. It can lead to:
Low self esteem
Mood problems
Stress

Did you know these 6 fruits could help you beat stress?
Know Now

ALTERNATIVE THERAPIES FOR BEDWETTING
Alternative Therapies For Bedwetting

The alternative therapies for bedwetting include:
1. UROTHERAPY
1. Urotherapy
This involves giving the child behavioral training, which includes limiting fluid intake before bed, enhancing awareness of daytime voiding (the process of removing urine), and voiding before bedtime.
2. MOTIVATIONAL THERAPY (POSITIVE REINFORCEMENT)
2. Motivational therapy (positive reinforcement)
It involves giving the children prizes or stickers for following the urotherapy guidelines. It is helpful for the children who are motivated to treat their bedwetting.
This technique has shown a reduction in relapse rate and bedwetting frequency in children between 5 to 7 years of age having mild symptoms ( <7 nights/week)
3. BIOFEEDBACK
3. Biofeedback
The technique records individuals' responses, such as heart rate, muscle tension, brain activity, etc., after stimulation. By analyzing the triggers, it helps alleviate physical and emotional symptoms.
LIVING WITH BEDWETTING
Living With Bedwetting

Bedwetting can have both physical and emotional impacts on a child’s life. It does not resolve immediately with treatment. The journey to dry night is a progression that requires a lot of patience from both the child and the caregiver.


ROLE OF CAREGIVERS -  MANAGING EMOTIONAL ASPECT
Role of caregivers -  Managing emotional aspect
Bedwetting can be a frustrating and embarrassing condition for a grown-up child. These children may suffer from poor self-esteem. As per the study, children with chronic bedwetting problems are more likely to develop behavior problems, such as aggressive behavior and attention problems.

The following measures from a parent/caregiver help in managing the emotional fluctuations in a child:
Reassure and educate the child about bedwetting
Give answers to every question of the child
Support the child and let them know that various kids have the same problem
Try to minimize the number of investigations by preparing well in advance by recording the symptoms well in advance
Understand the fact that bedwetting is not in control of your child instead of blaming them
Set a no-teasing rule in the family in which nobody is allowed to tease the child
Do not punish or reprimand the child, as it can make the feeling of shame even worse
Reward the child not for dry nights but for adhering to the treatment guidelines
Ease any anxiety or stress during bedtime by creating a quiet environment. Read a book together, massage the child, or tell the storiesDid our information help you?In our relentless endeavour to keep improving our services, you are our eyes. Kindly take out sometime to guide us on how to serve your better.Share your feedbackSubscribe to stay informedSubscribe to our carefully crafted informative emailers by Medical Experts and be the first to get the latest health news, tips and important updates.SubmitDisclaimerTata 1mg's sole intention is to ensure that its consumers get information that is expert-reviewed, accurate and trustworthy. However, the information contained herein should NOT be used as a substitute for the advice of a qualified physician. The information provided here is for informational purposes only. This may not cover all possible side effects, drug interactions or warnings or alerts. Please consult your doctor and discuss all your queries related to any disease or medicine. We intend to support, not replace, the doctor-patient relationship.

--- REFERENCES ---

- Gomez Rincon M, Leslie SW, Lotfollahzadeh S. Nocturnal Enuresis. [Updated 2023 June 26]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2023 Jan.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK545181/)
- Bedwetting and Sleep, Sleep Foundation, Last Updated On: February 06, 2022.  (https://www.sleepfoundation.org/children-and-sleep/bedwetting)
- Kiddoo DA. Nocturnal enuresis. CMAJ. 2012 May 15;184(8):908-11. doi: 10.1503/cmaj.111652. Epub 2012 Apr 23. PMID: 22529169; PMCID: PMC3348193.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3348193/)
- DiBianco JM, Morley C, Al-Omar O. Nocturnal enuresis: A topic review and institution experience. Avicenna journal of medicine. 2014 Oct;4(04):77-86.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4251068/)
- Weiss ES. Children with enuresis. CMAJ. 2012 Aug 7;184(11):1283. doi: 10.1503/cmaj.112-2059. PMID: 22872858; PMCID: PMC3414605.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3414605/)
