https://www.1mg.com/diseases/blood-cancer-217#

BLOOD CANCER
Blood cancerAlso known as Leukemia.
OVERVIEW
Overview
Blood cancer is a group of diseases affecting the production and function of blood cells, typically originating in the bone marrow. It is caused by genetic mutations or abnormal changes in blood cell DNA, leading to uncontrolled growth of abnormal cells that interfere with normal blood functions.

Blood cancer can be acute (onset is sudden and more severe) or chronic (develops slowly over a long time and is less aggressive). Symptoms of blood cancer include fatigue, frequent infections, unexplained weight loss, easy bruising or bleeding, and swollen lymph nodes. Acute cases show sudden, severe symptoms, while chronic cases progress slowly with milder signs.

There are various treatment options available that can improve the life of people with blood cancer. Treatment modalities such as chemotherapy, immunotherapy, and stem cell transplant are known to help slow the progression of the disease.
KEY FACTS
Key FactsUsually seen inChildren below 15 years of age (ALL)Individuals between 40 to 60 years of age (AML)Individuals above 55 years of age (CLL)Individuals above 65 years of age (CML)Gender affectedBoth men and women but more common in menBody part(s) involvedBloodSpleenBrainPrevalenceWorldwide: 5.185 Lakh (2017)Mimicking ConditionsAplastic anemiaAgranulocytosisInfectious mononucleosisBone marrow failureSystemic lupus erythematosusBleeding disordersAutoimmune thrombocytopenic purpuraLeukemoid reaction to infectionViral induced cytopenia, lymphadenopathy and organomegalyDrug induced cytopeniasMyelodysplastic syndromesBenign cancer conditionsNecessary health tests/imagingLaboratory tests:Flow cytometry, Cytochemistry,Complete blood count (CBC),Peripheral smear examination,Coagulation profile,Kidney function test, andLiver function test.Bone marrow biopsyLymph node FNAC & biopsyImaging studies:PET CT scan, CT Scan,Chest X-rayand Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanLumbar punctureTreatmentChemotherapy:Vincristine,Daunorubicin,Cytarabine,Mercaptopurine, andIfosfamide.Targeted therapy:Inotuzumab, Gemtuzumab,Rituximab,OfatumumabObinutuzumab,Imatinib mesylate,Dasatinib,Nilotinib, Ponatinib,Ruxolitinib, and Fedratinib.Immunotherapy:PembrolizumabandAtezolizumabRadiation therapyStem cell transplantSupportive care:Antiemetic drugs (ondansetron,palonosetron), Recombinant human erythropoietin alpha preparations, Antibiotics and Antiviral medications.Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T-cell treatmentSpecialists to consultHematologistHemato oncologistMedical oncologistPediatric oncologistBone marrow transplant specialistRelated NGOsCancer Care TrustLeukemia and Lymphoma SocietySee All
SYMPTOMS OF BLOOD CANCER
Symptoms Of Blood Cancer


Certain chronic leukemias may not cause noticeable symptoms at first, and symptoms may appear as the condition progresses. Acute types of blood cancer can cause aggressive symptoms, such as:RecurrentfeverRecurrent infectionsEnlarged lymph nodesJoint painsUnintentional weight lossFatigue,tirednessAbdominal pain due toenlarged spleenEasy bruising and bleedingNosebleedsand bleeding gums.Tiny red spots in the skin (called petechiae)Purplish patches in the skinBreathlessnessConfusionHeadaches

Cancer can be a challenging journey, but support makes all the difference. Tata 1mg is committed to ensuring you have access to quality cancer care every step of the way.
Explore The Platform
CAUSES OF BLOOD CANCER
Causes Of Blood Cancer


Blood cancer is cancer that affects the bone marrow and blood cells.
The exact cause of why blood cancer occurs is not yet identified.
It is thought to occur when the blood cells undergo genetic mutations and behave abnormally.
It starts when the DNA of a single cell in the bone marrow gets changed (mutation) and as a result, can’t develop, multiply, and function normally.
This rapid, out-of-control growth of abnormal cells takes place in the bone marrow and lymph nodes of the body. These abnormal cells then spill into the bloodstream.
Also, abnormal and excessive production of the white blood cells or leukocytes causes overcrowding and clumping in the blood vessels.
These abnormal cells also reduce the count of other normal blood cells, such as red blood cells and platelets.
The white blood cells are responsible for fighting off infections and keeping the body’s immune system healthy.
With blood cancer, the abnormal white blood cells are unable to function properly, and thus the body becomes susceptible to infections.

Learn how to prevent, detect, and manage cancer effectively! Watch our World Cancer Day video to explore common types of cancer, causes, symptoms, and key prevention tips to safeguard your health.
Click Here
TYPES OF BLOOD CANCER
Types Of Blood Cancer


Based on whether it is an acute or chronic condition and the type of cells affected, blood cancer (leukemia) is divided into the following four types:
1. ACUTE LYMPHOCYTIC LEUKEMIA (ALL)
1. Acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL)
This is the most common type of leukemia that affects children but can affect adults too.
Acute lymphocytic leukemia occurs when the bone marrow produces an abnormal amount of white blood cells or leukocytes very rapidly.


2. ACUTE MYELOGENOUS LEUKEMIA (AML)
2. Acute myelogenous leukemia (AML)
This is the most common type of acute blood cancer.
It is more common in adults (those between 40-60 years of age) and in men compared with women.
In this type of blood cancer, the bone marrow produces an abnormal amount of immature white cells called myeloid blast cells that later divide into abnormal RBCs, WBCs, or platelets.


3. CHRONIC LYMPHOCYTIC LEUKEMIA (CLL)
3. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL)
This type of cancer is most commonly seen in people above the age of 55.
Children and adolescents are rarely affected by this type t and it is more common in men than women.
This is a slowly progressive cancer where the bone marrow produces an abnormal amount of white blood cells over some time.


4. CHRONIC MYELOGENOUS LEUKEMIA (CML)
4. Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML)
This leukemia is more common in older adults (most common in those over 65 years of age) and men.
In this type, the body continues to produce abnormal myeloid cells that create the other blood cells.

Note:There are other rare types of leukemias such as hairy cell leukemia, multiple myeloma, myelomonocytic leukemia, granular lymphocytic leukemia, Burkitt's lymphoma, etc.
RISK FACTORS FOR BLOOD CANCER
Risk Factors For Blood Cancer


Certain factors can increase the risk of a person developing blood cancer. These include:
1. FAMILY HISTORY
1. Family history
There is a higher risk of developing leukemia if a close family member has suffered from leukemia.


2. SMOKING
2. Smoking
Smoking tobacco products and cigarettes increase the risk of leukemia. 20% of all acute myeloid leukemia cases are linked to smoking.


3. CHEMOTHERAPY AND RADIATION
3. Chemotherapy and radiation
Chemotherapy or radiation for cancers like breast, ovarian, or Hodgkin's lymphoma can raise the risk of leukemia later in life.


4. GENETIC SYNDROMES
4. Genetic syndromes
Down’s syndrome, Fanconi’s anemia, Li Fraumeni syndrome, etc., are diseases caused due to genetic abnormalities and have been associated with a higher risk of leukemia.


5. VIRAL INFECTIONS
5. Viral infections
Exposure to certain viruses, such as the Epstein-Barr virus, human T-cell leukemia virus, etc., can increase the chances of leukemia.

Prevent viral infections by adopting these habits.
Learn More
6. EXPOSURE TO CARCINOGENS

6. Exposure to carcinogens
Certain chemicals, such as benzene, are known carcinogens and increase the risk of leukemia.Did you know?
Some cancers can be prevented by vaccination. There are currently no vaccines that can prevent all cancers. However, vaccines against some viruses have proven extremely effective, thereby providing a certain degree of protection against cancers caused by these viruses.

Here’s more on the cancers that can be prevented with vaccination.Read To Know
DIAGNOSIS OF BLOOD CANCER
Diagnosis Of Blood Cancer


The doctor conducts a thorough physical examination and reviews the history of symptoms, using various studies to diagnose and determine the subtype of blood cancer. These include:
1. PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
1. Physical examination
Your doctor will look for physical signs of blood cancer such as pale skin from anemia, swelling of your lymph nodes, and enlargement of your liver and spleen.
2. LABORATORY TESTS

2. Laboratory tests
Flow cytometry:It aids in the detection of antigens present on or inside the cells based on their specific characteristics. It also helps in monitoring the recurrence of the disease, assessing the extent of cancer, and checking the efficacy of ongoing treatment.Cytochemistry: Ithelps in the diagnosis of different types of acute blood cancers with the use of cytochemical stains.
Complete blood count (CBC): It is required to study the quantities and morphology of the different blood cells.
Peripheral smear examination: It is necessary to evaluate the blood cells in greater detail.
Supportive testslikecoagulation profile,kidney function test,liver function test, etc., may be essential to evaluate the overall health status.
3. BONE MARROW STUDIES & BIOPSY

3. Bone marrow studies & biopsyBone marrow biopsy: This is a procedure in which a needle is used to withdraw a sample of the cancerous cells or tissue from the bone marrow. It helps in the diagnosis of abnormal cells such as those found in cancerous tumors or tumor markers.

Bone marrow aspiration: It is a procedure in which a sample is drawn from the fluid portion of the bone marrow with the help of a fine needle. It checks for cancerous cells.

Lymph node FNAC & biopsy: These are used to examine lesions or lumps inside the body observed by touch or during a scan to detect tumors in different parts of the body.
4. IMAGING STUDIES

4. Imaging studiesAPET CT scan (whole body): It may be performed to check for signs of blood cancer in the body.

CT Scan:  It not only helps to check for the presence of cancerous cells but also plays a vital role in the treatment of blood cancer such as bone marrow transplants.

Note:Your doctor may order achest X-ray or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanif you have symptoms that indicate a complication of leukemia.

5. LUMBAR PUNCTURE
5. Lumbar puncture
A lumbar puncture (also called a spinal tap) may be ordered to see if cancer had spread to the spinal fluid surrounding the brain and spinal cord.

Unable to find a lab that covers all the tests and gives accurate results? We have you covered. With Tata 1mg get all your tests done easily and get your results on time.
Book Today
CELEBS AFFECTED
Celebs affectedJill ClayburghAward-winning actress Jill Clayburgh battled chronic myelocytic leukemia for 20 years.
PREVENTION OF BLOOD CANCER
Prevention Of Blood Cancer

Avoiding exposure to known risk factors such as benzene, radiation, smoking, etc., may reduce the chances of developing blood cancer.

Although cancer cannot be prevented, there are some simple and effective lifestyle changes that YOU can make now to ward off the cancer risk. Want to know how to reduce cancer risk?
Click Here

SPECIALIST TO VISIT
Specialist To Visit


The diagnosis and treatment of blood cancer require a comprehensive approach. Specialists that can help include:

Hematologist
Hemato-oncologist
Medical oncologist
Pediatric oncologist
Bone marrow transplant specialist

Ahematologistfocuses on diagnosing and treating blood disorders, including blood cancers.

Ahemato-oncologistspecializes in managing both blood disorders and blood-related cancers.

Amedical oncologistoversees cancer treatments such as chemotherapy, immunotherapy, and targeted therapies.

Apediatric oncologisttreats cancers in children, including leukemia and other blood cancers.

Abone marrow transplant specialistperforms transplants to replace damaged or diseased bone marrow with healthy stem cells.Did you know the Philadelphia chromosome?
The Philadelphia chromosome, named for the city in which it was discovered in 1960, is a marker in almost all cases of CML and some cases of ALL. The discovery of the Philadelphia chromosome was a game-changer in the treatment of leukemia. Genetically targeted treatments were based on this. These targeted treatments kill unhealthy cells more precisely and leave healthy cells undamaged.

Don’t ignore any symptoms and get tested by a doctor.Consult Now
TREATMENT OF BLOOD CANCER
Treatment Of Blood Cancer


Treatment of leukemia depends on the type of disease and the patient’s overall health condition. Majorly, the treatment approaches are as follows:
1. CHEMOTHERAPY
1. Chemotherapy
The length of time for treatment can vary by regimen ranging from six months to indefinite treatment. These include drugs such as:VincristineDaunorubicinCytarabineMercaptopurineIfosfamide
2. TARGETED THERAPY

2. Targeted therapy
With targeted therapy, drugs are given against a cancer cell-specific target. These targets of drugs are generally not present in normal dividing cells of our body. Examples of targeted therapy include:Monoclonal antibodies such asInotuzumab, Gemtuzumab,Rituximab,OfatumumabObinutuzumab, andAlemtuzumabTyrosine kinase inhibitors such asImatinib mesylate,Dasatinib,Nilotinib, Ponatinib,Ruxolitinib, and Fedratinib.


3. IMMUNOTHERAPY
3. Immunotherapy
As the name suggests, immunotherapy works by helping the immune system work to fight cancer cells. This therapy uses substances that activate the body's immune system to work against the cancer cells:
Pembrolizumab
Atezolizumab


4. RADIATION THERAPY
4. Radiation therapy
This therapy uses radiation (high-energy rays similar to X-rays) to kill the cancer cells.
This treatment uses strong beams of energy to kill focus present in the body forming cancer cells (lymph nodes) or leukemia cells or stopping them from growing.
Radiation targets specific areas with cancer cells or can be applied to the whole body during a stem cell transplant..
This therapy can also be used along with other treatment modalities such as chemotherapy and surgery.


5. STEM CELL TRANSPLANT
5. Stem cell transplant
Also known as hematopoietic stem cell transplant or bone marrow transplant, this procedure replaces the cancerous blood-forming cells with new,  healthy hematopoietic cells.
These healthy cells are taken from the patient (before exposure to chemotherapy or radiation therapy) or from a donor’s blood or bone marrow and are infused into the patient's blood. Healthy hematopoietic cells grow and multiply forming new bone marrow and blood cells that develop into all the different types of cells your body needs (red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets).


6. SUPPORTIVE CARE
6. Supportive care
Supportive care is required for patients to help stimulate the production of blood cells, combat infections, and manage side effects, such as nausea, vomiting, etc.
Antiemetic drugs provide relief from nausea and vomiting (ondansetron,palonosetron).
Recombinant human erythropoietin alpha preparations help produce red blood cells and help treat anemia due to leukemia or post-chemotherapy.
Various antibiotics and antiviral medications are used to prevent and treat infections.
.
7. CHIMERIC ANTIGEN RECEPTOR (CAR) T-CELL TREATMENT
7. Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T-cell treatment
This is a new form of therapy where the patient’s own T-lymphocyte cells are harvested and engineered in the laboratory to make them capable of fighting the leukemia cells.
These cells are then reinserted into the body.
LIVING WITH BLOOD CANCER
Living With Blood Cancer

With advancements in treatment, many leukemia patients enjoy long, healthy lives, though the journey can be emotionally challenging. Open communication, lifestyle adjustments, and support from loved ones or professionals can help manageanxietyand maintain positivity. Here are some helpful tips:

1. LEARN ABOUT YOUR DIAGNOSIS
1. Learn about your diagnosis
Don’t be afraid to ask your healthcare team about anything you don’t understand.
It is best to ask your doctor about your health and condition rather than search online or depend on other people for help.


2. JOIN A SUPPORT GROUP
2. Join a support group
A support group can keep you cheered up since the other participants will have their insights into cancer treatment.
You can even find inspiration from the other members, or strategies for coping with pain or other side effects of treatment.


3. TAKE CARE OF YOUR MENTAL AND EMOTIONAL HEALTH
3. Take care of your mental and emotional health

Discuss feelings with close family members and friends
Get all the information required to proceed with the treatment
Be conscious of your physical limitations
Resolve practical issues like childcare or work problems.


4. MONITOR THE COST OF CANCER TREATMENT
4. Monitor the cost of cancer treatment

Apart from the cost of treatment, there can be some other unexpected costs as well. This can discourage many patients from continuing the treatment.
This can be controlled by requesting benefits or grants from the social worker, they can also assist in the process of claiming.


5. MAKE SLEEP A PRIORITY
5. Make sleep a priority
Sleep can be elusive when you’re feeling anxious or depressed, or even just exhausted from your cancer treatment.
But a lack of sleep can make you feel even more anxious or despairing.


Try our widest range of products to help you get a good night’s sleep. But, remember to always consult your doctor before trying anything new.
Explore Sleep Aids
HOME-CARE FOR BLOOD CANCER
Home-care For Blood Cancer

People with blood cancer suffer from chronic fatigue and are at risk of getting recurrent infections. Also, the chemotherapy sessions bring about various side effects. There are a few things you can do to care for yourself or a loved one suffering from blood cancer:
1. EAT RIGHT
1. Eat right
Eat fresh home-cooked meals and drink plenty of water or energy drinks daily.


2. TRY HOME REMEDIES
2. Try home remedies
Nausea, and vomiting due to chemotherapy can be managed with medications or home remedies like sucking on peppermint lozenges.


3. KEEP INFECTIONS AT BAY
3. Keep infections at bay
Follow good hand hygiene
Avoid crowded places and unhygienic places
Wear a surgical mask when visiting the hospital.

Buy Masks Here
4. BE ACTIVE

4. Be active
Engage in light physical activity as it will help boost energy levels and help with symptoms of chronic fatigue.Did you know?
September 22 is Chronic Myeloid Leukemia (CML) Day. 9/22 represents the genetic change of chromosomes 9 and 22 that causes the disease. The hidden cancer cells are a reason why leukemia comes back or relapses. Cancer can be treated effectively if diagnosed early.

Know the symptoms of cancer.Click To Read
COMPLICATIONS OF BLOOD CANCER
Complications Of Blood Cancer


In the terminal stages, the patient sleeps through most of the day and has reduced appetite, extreme muscle wasting, feeble heartbeat, etc.
It may also cause other complications, such as:
Recurrent and serious bacterial or fungal infections.
Tumor lysis syndrome is a side effect of chemotherapy where the tumor cells die quickly and result in dangerously high levels of metabolites, harming the kidneys.
Disseminated intravascular coagulation is a condition in which the blood clots abnormally and leads to thrombosis or hemorrhage.
Leukemia survivors are at a higher risk of getting other types of cancers as well.

Cancer often shows subtle signs, making early detection crucial for effective treatment, better outcomes, and reduced complications in health and well-being.
Read More
ALTERNATIVE THERAPIES FOR LEUKEMIA
Alternative Therapies For Leukemia

Alternative therapies can be used to provide symptomatic relief for patients with blood cancer. However, it is important to understand that it should not replace conventional treatments. Always consult your doctor before starting anything new.
1. YOGA AND EXERCISE
1. Yoga and exercise
Yoga and exercise can help boost energy levels and combat chronic fatigue.
Breathing exercises can help with relaxation.
It can also induce feelings of positivity and help deal with the diagnosis.

Learn more about other health benefits of yoga.
Read This
2. MASSAGE

2. Massage
Foot and body massages can help with relaxation and provide symptomatic relief.


3. AROMATHERAPY
3. Aromatherapy
Aromatherapy is the use of certain scents to induce relaxation of the mind and body.
It promotes a feeling of calmness and positivity.


4. ACUPRESSURE AND ACUPUNCTURE
4. Acupressure and acupuncture
Acupressure and acupuncture techniques also help combat pain, fatigue, and other symptoms.


5. MEDITATION
5. Meditation
Meditation techniques like focused breathing, positive imagery, etc. help deal withstressand anxiety post-diagnosis.
It helps increase mental strength and willpower, essential to fight such grave diseases.Did our information help you?In our relentless endeavour to keep improving our services, you are our eyes. Kindly take out sometime to guide us on how to serve your better.Share your feedbackSubscribe to stay informedSubscribe to our carefully crafted informative emailers by Medical Experts and be the first to get the latest health news, tips and important updates.SubmitDisclaimerTata 1mg's sole intention is to ensure that its consumers get information that is expert-reviewed, accurate and trustworthy. However, the information contained herein should NOT be used as a substitute for the advice of a qualified physician. The information provided here is for informational purposes only. This may not cover all possible side effects, drug interactions or warnings or alerts. Please consult your doctor and discuss all your queries related to any disease or medicine. We intend to support, not replace, the doctor-patient relationship.

--- REFERENCES ---

- Lyengar V, Shimanovsky A. Leukemia. StatPearls Publishing; 2021 Jan.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK560490/)
- Terwilliger T, Abdul-Hay M. Acute lymphoblastic leukemia: a comprehensive review and 2017 update. Blood Cancer J. 2017 Jun 30;7(6):e577.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5520400/)
- Chennamadhavuni A, Lyengar V, Mukkamalla SKR, Shimanovsky A. Leukemia. In: StatPearls. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; January 17, 2023.  (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32809325/ )
- MD Anderson Cancer Center. Leukemia [Internet]. Houston (TX): MD Anderson Cancer Center; [cited 2025 Jan 7]. Available from:  (https://www.mdanderson.org/cancer-types/leukemia.html )
- K Lechner et al. Treatment of acute leukemia. Annals of Oncology. Volume 10, Supplement 6, S45-S52, January 1999.  (https://www.annalsofoncology.org/article/S0923-7534(19)55281-4/pdf)
- Jennifer Goy et al. The clinical and diagnostic pathway for adults with acute leukemia. BCMJ, vol. 59 , No. 1 , January February 2017 , Pages 22-28 Clinical Articles.  (https://bcmj.org/articles/clinical-and-diagnostic-pathway-adults-acute-leukemia-bc)
- M Mohammadian et al. A study on the incidence and mortality of leukemia and their association with the human development index (HDI) worldwide in 2012. World Cancer Research Journal. WCRJ 2018; 5 (2): e1080.  (https://www.wcrj.net/wp-content/uploads/sites/5/2018/06/e1080-A-study-on-the-incidence-and-mortality-of-Leukemia-and-their-association-with-the-Human-Development-Index-HDI-worldwide-in-2012.pdf)
- Wesa KM, Cassileth BR. Is there a role for complementary therapy in the management of leukemia? Expert Rev Anticancer Ther. 2009 Sep;9(9):1241-9.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2792198/)
- National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health. Cancer and Complementary Health Approaches: What You Need To Know. Accessed January 8, 2025.  (https://www.nccih.nih.gov/health/cancer-and-complementary-health-approaches-what-you-need-to-know  )
- Dong Y, Shi O, Zeng Q, et al. Leukemia incidence trends at the global, regional, and national level between 1990 and 2017. Exp Hematol Oncol. 2020;9:14  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7304189/ )
- Hijiya N, Schultz KR, Metzler M, Millot F, Suttorp M. Pediatric chronic myeloid leukemia is a unique disease that requires a different approach. Blood. 2016 Jan 28;127(4):392-9.  (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4915793/ )
- Dong Y, Shi O, Zeng Q, Lu X, Wang W, Li Y, Wang Q. Leukemia incidence trends at the global, regional, and national level between 1990 and 2017. Exp Hematol Oncol. 2020 Jun 19;9:14. doi: 10.1186/s40164-020-00170-6.  (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7304189/)
- Dolak K. Actress Jill Clayburgh Dead at 66. ABC News. November 6, 2010. Available from:  (https://abcnews.go.com/Entertainment/actress-jill-clayburgh-dead-66/story?id=12074651  )
- Leukemia & Lymphoma Society [Internet]. Available from:  (https://www.lls.org/)
- Cancer Care Trust [Internet]. Available from:  (https://cancercaretrust.org/)
