https://www.1mg.com/diseases/calcium-deficiency-759#

CALCIUM DEFICIENCY
Calcium deficiency
OVERVIEW
Overview
Calcium is one of the most abundant minerals in the body. An average human body contains about 1 kg of calcium. It regulates normal heart rhythm, maintains structure of bone and teeth, aids in clotting of blood, contracting of muscles, and helps in proper functioning of nerves.

The total serum calcium levels below 8.8 mg/dL is considered as calcium deficiency. The primary symptoms include rough hair, brittle nail, dry skin, itching, cataracts (clouding of eye lens), and poor quality of teeth.

The sudden drop in calcium level may even lead to serious symptoms such as cardiovascular collapse, irregular heartbeat, seizures, and neuromuscular irritability. These symptoms need hospitalization.

Lactose intolerance, restrictive diets, liver and kidney diseases, pregnancy, menopause amongst others are known to increase its risk.

Daily consumption of foods rich in calcium such as milk, cheese, yogurt, spinach, kale, broccoli, and nuts are the best way to prevent calcium deficiency. Treatment includes consuming a calcium rich diet along with calcium and vitamin D supplements. Acute or severe calcium deficiency might require hospitalization.
KEY FACTS
Key FactsUsually seen inAll age groupsGender affectedBoth men and women but more common in womenBody part(s) involvedBonesTeethSkinKidneysHeartNervous systemBrainMimicking ConditionsAcutepancreatitisAcute renal failureHyperphosphatemiaHypomagnesemiaHypoparathyroidismNecessary health tests/imagingBlood tests:Total blood calcium,Phosphorus,Magnesium,Electrolytes,Creatinine,Alkaline phosphatase,PTH&Complete blood countImaging tests:Renal ultrasonography,Electrocardiography& Bone X-rayDNA sequencingSpecialists to consultGeneral physicianEndocrinologistNutritionistOphthalmologistDermatologistOrthopedicDentist
TYPES OF CALCIUM DEFICIENCY
Types Of Calcium deficiency
1. ACUTE HYPOCALCEMIA

1. Acute hypocalcemia
It refers to the severe drop of calcium in the blood rapidly. It may lead to serious complications which may also require hospitalization.
2. CHRONIC HYPOCALCEMIA
2. Chronic hypocalcemia
In this, the level of calcium drops gradually. Chronic hypocalcemia is well tolerated. However, treatment is required to prevent long-term complications.
SYMPTOMS OF CALCIUM DEFICIENCY
Symptoms Of Calcium deficiency

The most important functions of calcium include:
Regulating normal heart rhythms
Maintaining structure of bones and teeth
Clotting of blood clotting
Contraction of muscles
Normal functioning of nerves


Acute hypocalcemia can result in severe symptoms that may require hospitalization. These symptoms involve the heart, kidney, neuromuscular systems:
Burning sensation usually in the arms, legs, and feet
Fainting
Muscle spasms
Muscle cramps (especially in the legs and back)
Difficulty in swallowing
Fatigue
Involuntary muscle movements
Wheezing
Numbness
Seizures
Laryngospasm (involuntary muscular contraction of the vocal folds)
Change in voice
Neuromuscular irritability
Impairment of memory
Kidney injury


Individuals who develop calcium deficiency gradually or have mild deficiency usually remain asymptomatic. Chronic hypoglycemia usually affects skin and hair over a period of time. The symptoms of which include:
Rough hair
Brittle nails
Dry skin
Itching
Cataracts (clouding of eye lens)
Poor quality of teethDid you know?Chvostek and Trousseau signs are the classical signs of hypocalcemia.  Chvostek sign is the twitching of the upper lip. The Trousseau sign is even a more characteristic sign. It  involves a characteristic posture of the hand when the sphygmomanometer (instrument used to measure blood pressure) cuff is inflated above the systolic blood pressure within 3 minutes.
CAUSES OF CALCIUM DEFICIENCY
Causes Of Calcium deficiency

The following causes and risk factors can contribute to calcium deficiency:
1. LOW CALCIUM DIET
1. Low calcium diet
Individuals who are on a low calcium diet are more likely to develop calcium deficiency. This includes people withlactose intoleranceandfood allergies.
Restrictive diets like those consumed by vegans that involve elimination of rich sources of calcium from food also increases the risk of calcium deficiency. Studies have also shown that vegans have a low mineral density due to lower blood calcium levels.

Are you a vegetarian? Get your daily calcium from these superfoods!
Read to Know
2. VITAMIN D DEFICIENCY

2. Vitamin D deficiency
It is one of the most significant risk factors of calcium deficiency as Vitamin D plays a very important role in the absorption of calcium.

Feel tiredness, weakness or joint pain? Well, it could be vitamin D deficiency.
Know More
3. PREGNANCY

3. Pregnancy
Pregnant women are also at higher risk of developing hypocalcemia due increased nutritional requirements, and persistent vomiting.

Here are 9 superfoods that you must have for a healthy pregnancy.
Click to Know
4. MENOPAUSE

4. Menopause
Menopause increases the risk of calcium deficiency. Women lose upto 1% of their bone mineral density every year after menopause. It is because of the decrease in the level of calcium due to hormonal changes.

Perimenopausal test helps to detect the levels of hormones regulating the menstrual cycle and determine the onset of menopause.
Book Now
5. CERTAIN MEDICAL CONDITIONS

5. Certain medical conditions
Certain medical conditions increase the risk of calcium deficiency through several mechanisms. Some of them include:
Hypoparathyroidism
Pseudohypoparathyroidism
Altered magnesium levels
High levels of potassium
Liver diseases
Chronic kidney diseases
Sclerotic metastases
Sepsis
Pancreatitis
Fanconi syndrome


6. MASSIVE BLOOD TRANSFUSION
6. Massive blood transfusion
The massive blood transfusion makes the individual more prone to develop deficiency of calcium. This is due to the use of chelation products as a preservative which binds with calcium and makes it inactive.

Here are 6 blood group facts that you should know!
Read to Know
7. CERTAIN MEDICATIONS

7. Certain medications
The prolonged use of certain medications is also associated with a decrease in calcium level. The common examples include:
Intravenous bisphosphonates
Denosumab
Cisplatin
Cinacalcet
Foscarnet
Rifampin
Chloroquine


8. RADIOACTIVE IODINE (RAI) THERAPY
8. Radioactive iodine (RAI) therapy
People who have undergone RAI therapy may develop calcium deficiency due to the destruction of the parathyroid gland. Studies have shown a decrease in serum calcium levels after 6 months of RAI.Did you know?Pseudohypocalcemia refers to the low level of total blood calcium as a result of a drop in albumin (major calcium bound protein). This gives a false impression of having calcium deficiency as in these cases, the free (ionized) calcium remains normal.
DIAGNOSIS OF CALCIUM DEFICIENCY
Diagnosis Of Calcium deficiency

Thorough medical history and physical examination is done before initiating any laboratory test.
1. BLOOD TESTS
1. Blood tests
The basic investigations through a blood test include:
Total blood calcium
Phosphorus
Magnesium
Electrolytes
Creatinine
Alkaline phosphatase
PTH
Complete blood count (CBC)

Here’s more on what you must know about the CBC test, its various parameters.
Tap to Know
2. IMAGING TESTS

2. Imaging tests
Renal ultrasonography:This involves the use of sound waves to look for the images of kidneys. It is performed to look for the abnormalities in the kidney which may be a cause of increased excretion of calcium.
Electrocardiography (ECG):The deficiency of calcium affects the normal functioning of the heart. An ECG  is  obtained to look for the changes in heart.
Bone X-rays:X-rays will be conducted to check for any deformities in the bones.
3. DNA SEQUENCING
3. DNA sequencing
It is done to look for genetic causes of calcium deficiency.


Looking for a trusted lab to get your tests done? Get tested with Tata 1mg labs to offer accurate and on-time results.
Click to Book

PREVENTION OF CALCIUM DEFICIENCY
Prevention Of Calcium deficiency


1. ENSURE ADEQUATE INTAKE OF CALCIUM
1. Ensure adequate intake of calcium
The best way to prevent calcium deficiency is to fulfill the recommended diet. The dietary recommendations amount as per the age are:
0-6 months: 200 mg
7-12 months: 260 mg
1-3 years: 700 mg
4-8 years: 1000 mg
9-13 years: 1300 mg
19-70 years: 1000 mg
>70 years: 1200 mg


This can be achieved by consuming food rich in calcium which include:
Milk, yogurt, and cheese ( richest source of calcium)
Soybeans
Spinach
Green turnip
Kale
Applewith skin
Broccoli
Fortified breakfast cereals
Tofu made from calcium salts
Canned sardines and salmon
Nuts
Almond butter
Eggs


Along With calcium, Vitamin D is also very necessary to absorb the calcium in the body. Here is the right way to get Vitamin D through sun, diet and supplements.
Know Now

2. AVOID RESTRICTIVE DIETS
2. Avoid restrictive diets
Fad diets generally lead to nutrient deprivation. Avoiding restrictive diets may help prevent the deficiency.

Know from our expert how to get complete nutrition from healthy eating habits.
Watch Now
3. TREAT UNDERLYING MEDICAL CONDITIONS

3. Treat underlying medical conditions
People with underlying health conditions such as liver disease and chronic kidney disease are more likely to develop calcium deficiency. Therefore treating the underlying condition may help in maintaining the optimum level of calcium.
SPECIALIST TO VISIT
Specialist To Visit

The diagnosis and management of calcium deficiency requires a team of doctors. The speciality of doctors that helps in correcting calcium deficiency along with managing symptoms and complications include:
General physician
Endocrinologist
Nutritionist
Ophthalmologist
Dermatologist
Orthopediacian
Dentist
A general physician helps in diagnosing calcium deficiency through general examination and blood tests.
An endocrinologist helps in managing the condition of the parathyroid gland which can be involved in many calcium deficiency cases.
A nutritionist can guide and help improve calcium intake through diet.
An ophthalmologist helps in managing the eye related disorder such as cataracts that may manifest as a result of this deficiency.
A dermatologist helps in treating the symptoms related to skin, hair, and nails that generally occurs in case of chronic calcium deficiency.
An orthopedician and dentist can take care of the complications of bones and teeth, respectively.

Consult India’s best doctor from the comfort of your home.
Consult Now

TREATMENT OF CALCIUM DEFICIENCY
Treatment Of Calcium deficiency

The treatment of the calcium deficiency depends upon the duration and severity of symptoms. The underlying disorder is treated alongwith correcting the level of calcium. The treatment options include:
1. CALCIUM SUPPLEMENTATION
1. Calcium supplementation
Oral calcium supplements are available in chewable tablets, capsules, liquids, and powders. The goal is to administer 1500 to 2000 mg elemental calcium per day divided into 2 to 3 doses.
The common example of calcium supplements include:
Calcium carbonate
Calcium citrate
Calcium gluconate
Calcium lactate

The best calcium supplements are just a single click away.
Buy Now

Patients with a severe drop in calcium require a continuous intravenous drip of calcium. This is done to prevent cardiac complications such as arrhythmia.


2. VITAMIN D SUPPLEMENTATION
2. Vitamin D supplementation
The supplements of Vitamin D are always given with calcium supplements. It helps in increasing the absorption of calcium.
A dose of 50,000 units weekly for 8 to 12 weeks is given in patients with significant Vitamin D deficiency. It is followed by lower doses of 1000 to 5000 units daily.

Explore our range of Vitamin D supplements.
Order Now

HOME CARE FOR CALCIUM DEFICIENCY
Home Care For Calcium deficiency

Apart from dairy products, other rich sources of calcium that is available from your kitchen include:
1. India gooseberry (amla):It is a very rich source of calcium. The daily consumption of amla also boosts immunity. It can be taken raw. It can also be boiled in water and consumed.

Looking for products containing amla?
Add to Cart

2. Sesame (til):There are various hidden benefits of sesame including the abundance of calcium. An estimated 88 milligrams of calcium is present in one tablespoon of sesame seeds. It can be used as dressings in cereals, soups, and salads after crushing in the form of a powder.

The roasted sesame powder can also be consumed with a cup of warm milk.

2. Cumin (jeera):A small amount of cumin seeds contains a huge amount of calcium. The consumption of cumin water at least twice/day is proven to be beneficial in calcium deficiency. The cumin water can be prepared by boiling a teaspoon of cumin seeds with a glass of water.

3.Ashwagandha:It is a very ancient ayurvedic herb that is known for its antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties. It also contains calcium and thus helps in managing calcium deficiency. It is available in the market in the form of tablets and capsules.

Explore our wide range of ashwagandha supplements.
Shop Now

4. Guggul:It is a very well known herb for improving bone density as it is a rich source of calcium. It also fastens the recovery period of bone fracture. The consumption of guggul is also associated with an improvement in joint pain.

Mix the the extract of ¼  teaspoon of guggul extracts or powder in lukewarm water and sip it.

5. Ragi:It is a well known cereal used in Indian kitchens. It contains a huge amount of calcium. It is consumed as whole grain or flour.
COMPLICATIONS OF CALCIUM DEFICIENCY
Complications Of Calcium deficiency

Individuals with severe hypocalcemia (calcium level less than 7 mg/dl) or having an acute drop in calcium may develop:
Seizures
Arrhythmia
Cardiovascular collapse
Hypotension
Congestive heart failure
Angina
Coma (in rare cases)


The chronic long term calcium deficiency may lead to:
Osteoporosis
Rickets
Bone fracture
Weakened tooth enamel
LIVING WITH CALCIUM DEFICIENCY
Living With Calcium deficiency

Calcium deficiency mostly resolves within a few months with conscious eating and dietary supplements. The following measures might help in faster recovery:
1. CONSUME CALCIUM RICH CHAPATIS
1. Consume calcium rich chapatis
Make a dough by combining 2 parts wheat, 1 part soybean, and 1 part chana (chickpeas). Use this to make delicious, calcium-rich rotis for lunch and dinner. Chapatis made from ragi flour are also beneficial in elevating the level of calcium.
2. SPEND TIME IN THE SUN

2. Spend time in the sun
The early morning exposure of sunlight helps in the synthesis of Vitamin D in the body. This aids the absorption of calcium into the body.


3. DO NOT SELF MEDICATE
3. Do not self medicate
It is advised to consult health care professionals before starting supplements. The doctor prescribes the right dose as per your need. Calcium interacts with other medications which a doctor may help you to find and fix. Some common drugs to which calcium can interact include levothyroxine and lithium.


4. BE AWARE OF TOXICITY
4. Be aware of toxicity
Consuming a large amount of calcium supplements over a short period of time can cause toxicity. It is advised to consume supplements as per the recommended dose. The total calcium intake, from combined dietary and supplemental sources, should not exceed 2,500 mg per day.
The signs and symptoms of toxicity include:
Constipation
Nausea
Vomiting
Increased urination
Confusion
Irregular heart rhythm
Kidney damage


5. DEALING WITH CALCIUM DEFICIENCY IF LACTOSE INTOLERANT
5. Dealing with calcium deficiency if lactose intolerant
Individuals with lactose intolerance have a high probability to develop calcium deficiency. This is because of the avoidance of dairy products which are the richest source of calcium.The following measures might help in maintaining the optimum level of calcium:
Limit dairy products instead of avoiding
Include lactose-free or reduced-lactose dairy products, which contain the same amounts of calcium
Add non dairy sources of calcium in the diet. This includes some vegetables (e.g., kale, broccoli, and Chinese cabbage), canned fish with bones, or fortified foods (e.g., fruit juices, breakfast cereals, and tofu)
Eat the dairy products in conjunction with other foods to avoid symptoms of lactose intoleranceDid our information help you?In our relentless endeavour to keep improving our services, you are our eyes. Kindly take out sometime to guide us on how to serve your better.Share your feedbackSubscribe to stay informedSubscribe to our carefully crafted informative emailers by Medical Experts and be the first to get the latest health news, tips and important updates.SubmitDisclaimerTata 1mg's sole intention is to ensure that its consumers get information that is expert-reviewed, accurate and trustworthy. However, the information contained herein should NOT be used as a substitute for the advice of a qualified physician. The information provided here is for informational purposes only. This may not cover all possible side effects, drug interactions or warnings or alerts. Please consult your doctor and discuss all your queries related to any disease or medicine. We intend to support, not replace, the doctor-patient relationship.

--- REFERENCES ---

- Yu E, Sharma S. Physiology, Calcium. [Updated 2023 Aug 14]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2023 Jan.  (https://europepmc.org/article/NBK/nbk482128)
- Drake TM, Gupta V. Calcium. [Updated 2022 Nov 11]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2023 Jan.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK557683/)
- Fong J, Khan A. Hypocalcemia: updates in diagnosis and management for primary care. Can Fam Physician. 2012 Feb;58(2):158-62. PMID: 22439169; PMCID:PMC3279267.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3279267/)
- Calcium, National Institute Of Health, Office Of Dietary Supplements, Last Updated On: 06th October, 2022.  (https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Calcium-HealthProfessional/)
- Hypocalcemia, Nephrology, Drugs and Disease, Medscape, Last Updated On: 10 November, 2022.  (https://emedicine.medscape.com/article/241893-overview)
- Goyal A, Anastasopoulou C, Ngu M, et al. Hypocalcemia. [Updated 2022 Jul 24]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2023 Jan.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK430912/)
- Xiao L, Zhang W, Zhu H, Wang Y, Liu B, Huang R, Li L. Parathyroid Changes After RAI in Patients With Differentiated Thyroid Carcinoma. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2021 May 27;12:671787. doi: 10.3389/fendo.2021.671787. PMID: 34122347; PMCID:PMC8190475.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8190475/)
- Schafer AL, Shoback DM. Hypocalcemia: Diagnosis and Treatment. [Updated 2016 Jan 3]. In: Feingold KR, Anawalt B, Blackman MR, et al., editors. Endotext [Internet]. South Dartmouth (MA): MDText.com, Inc.; 2000.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK279022/)
