https://www.1mg.com/diseases/cervical-cancer-228#

CERVICAL CANCER
Cervical cancerAlso known as Cancer of the cervix.
OVERVIEW
Overview
The cervix is the lowermost part of the womb (uterus) that lies on top of the vagina. It plays an important role in preventing the ascent of pathogens from the vagina into the uterus and allowing the entry of sperm into the fallopian tubes (channel for transport of eggs and fertilization). It is also crucial for the maintenance of pregnancy in the uterus until the onset of labor.

Cervical cancer is a type of cancer that occurs in the cells of the cervix. This cancer can affect the deeper tissues of the cervix and may spread to other parts of the body (metastasize), often the lungs, liver, bladder, vagina, and rectum.

This cancer is the second most common female malignant (cancerous) tumor globally which seriously threatens female health. Nearly all cervical cancers are caused by an infection with human papillomavirus (HPV).

Some cases may not show any symptoms, but general symptoms include bleeding in between periods and after sexual intercourse. Foul-smelling white discharge and low back pain or lower abdominal pain may also be present. Treatments include surgery, radiation, chemotherapy, and palliative care.
KEY FACTS
Key FactsUsually seen inWomen between 35-44 years of age.Gender affectedWomenBody part(s) involvedCervixPrevalenceIndia:14.7 out of every 100,000 women (2022)Mimicking ConditionsCervical fibroidsEndometriosisCervical polypsNecessary health tests/imagingPap smearLiquid-based cytology (LBC)HPV testingVisual inspection with acetic acid (VIA)Endocervical curettageColposcopyBiopsyImaging:CT scan & PET scanTreatmentSurgical procedures:Conization, Hysterectomy & Loop electrosurgical excision procedure (LEEP)Radiation therapy:External-beam radiation therapy & Internal-beam radiation therapyChemotherapy:Cisplatin& Cisplatin with5-fluorouracil(5-FU)Targeted therapy:Bevacizumab& Tisotumab vedotinSpecialists to consultGynecologistGynecologic oncologistRadiation oncologistMedical oncologistSee All
SYMPTOMS OF CERVICAL CANCER
Symptoms Of Cervical Cancer

Cervical cancer symptoms are usually mild in the early stages and can go unnoticed. Symptoms according to the stage of cancer include:
EARLY OR STAGE 1 CERVICAL CANCER
Early or stage 1 cervical cancer
Early-stage cervical cancer may not cause symptoms, but signs of stage 1 may include:
Watery or bloody vaginal discharge
Foul odor in the vaginal discharge
Vaginal bleeding after sexual intercourse
Vaginal bleeding between menstrual periods
Longer and heavier menstrual periods
Bleeding post menopause
Discomfort during sexual intercourse


ADVANCED CERVICAL CANCER
Advanced cervical cancer
If there is a spread of cancer (metastasis) to nearby tissues or organs, symptoms may include:
Blood in urine
Diarrhea
Tiredness
Weight loss
Loss of appetite
A general feeling of being ill
Dull and aching pain in the back
Swelling in the legs
Pelvic/abdominal pain
Difficulty or pain during urination
Pain or bleeding from your rectum while passing the stool

Quality cancer care should never be left to chance. We, at Tata 1mg, are committed to offering the support, resources, and guidance needed to navigate every step of the journey.
Explore Cancer Care Platform


CAUSES OF CERVICAL CANCER
Causes Of Cervical Cancer

Almost all cervical cancers are caused by sexually transmitted human papillomavirus (HPV).
Most people will get HPV at some point in their lives and not realize it as the body fights against the infection.
However, if the body fails to fight persistent infection, it can cause the cells of your cervix to change to cancerous cells. HPV can spread from the following:

- Any direct skin-to-skin contact with the genitals
- Vaginal, anal, or oral sex
- Sharing sex toysDid you know?
Being infected with a cancer-causing strain of HPV doesn’t mean you’ll get cervical cancer. Your immune system eliminates the vast majority of HPV infections, often within 2 years. Read about different types of HPV.Click Now
TYPES OF CERVICAL CANCER
Types Of Cervical Cancer

Cervical cancers and cervical pre-cancers are classified based on their appearance on a microscope. They are most commonly of two types:
SQUAMOUS CELL CARCINOMA
Squamous cell carcinoma
It is the most common type (80-90%) that originates from the outer cervical cells, typically in the transformation zone where outer and inner cells meet.
ADENOCARCINOMAS
Adenocarcinomas
This is the other type that develops from the mucus-producing gland cells of the inner cells of the cervix (endocervix).

Note:Less commonly, cervical cancers have features of both squamous cell carcinomas and adenocarcinomas and are called adenosquamous carcinomas or mixed carcinomas.


Quality cancer care should never be left to chance. We, at Tata 1mg, are committed to offering the support, resources, and guidance needed to navigate every step of the journey.
Explore Cancer Care Platform
RISK FACTORS FOR CERVICAL CANCER
Risk Factors For Cervical Cancer

Several risk factors for cervical cancer are linked to exposure to HPV which include:
1. MULTIPLE SEXUAL PARTNERS
1. Multiple sexual partners
Many studies have suggested that women with multiple sexual partners are at high risk for HPV acquisition and cervical cancer.
Multiple sexual partners of the spouse can also be an additional risk factor.


3. EXCESSIVE USE OF ORAL CONTRACEPTIVES
3. Excessive use of oral contraceptives
Oral contraceptive (OC) pills are known to be a risk factor for cervical cancer.
It has been reported in a study that the use of OC for 5 years or more can double the risk of cancer.


4. SMOKING
4. Smoking
Smoking increases the chance of developing precancerous lesions of the cervix (called moderate or severe dysplasia) and increases the chance of developing cervical cancer.


Know This!
Smoking and HPV infections cause not just cervical cancer, but also the cancer of head and neck.
Learn More

5. HYGIENE PATTERNS
5. Hygiene patterns
Not using a sanitary napkin
Not maintaining vaginal hygiene
Not taking special care in cleaning their genitals when washing


6. WEAK IMMUNE SYSTEM
6. Weak immune systemHaving a weakened immune system due toHIV infections, autoimmune conditions or chemotherapy increases the risk of HPV infection and cervical cancer.Did you know?
Every 8 minutes, 1 woman dies of cervical cancer in India. Read about things you must know about cervical cancer.Click Here
DIAGNOSIS OF CERVICAL CANCER
Diagnosis Of Cervical Cancer

Early stages of cervical cancer don't usually involve symptoms and are hard to detect. The International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) classified cervical cancer stages into the following:

Stage 0:Also known as carcinoma in situ, it is the presence of abnormal cells in the innermost lining of the cervix.

Stage I:Invasive form of cancer that is only confined to the cervix.Stage Ia cervical carcinoma:Preclinical invasive carcinoma that can be diagnosed only by means of microscopy.Stage Ib cervical carcinoma:Clinically visible lesion that is confined to the cervix uteri.
- Stage Ib1:Primary tumor not greater than 4.0 cm in diameter.
- Stage Ib2:Primary tumor greater than 4.0 cm in diameter.

Stage II:The locally limited spread of cancer beyond the uterus but not to the pelvic sidewall or the lower third of the vagina.Stage IIa cervical carcinoma:Spread into the upper two-thirds of the vagina without parametrial (the fat and connective tissue that surrounds the uterus) invasion.Stage IIb cervical carcinoma:Extension into the parametrium but not into the pelvic sidewall.

Stage III:Cancerous spread to the pelvic sidewall or the lower third of the vagina, and/or hydronephrosis or a non-functioning kidney that is incident to invasion of the ureter.Stage IIIa cervical carcinoma:Extension into lower one-third of the vagina, without spread to the pelvic sidewall.Stage IIIb cervical carcinoma: Extension into the pelvic sidewall and/or invasion of the ureter, with the latter resulting in a non-functioning kidney or hydronephrosis.

Stage IV:Cancerous spread beyond the true pelvis or into the mucosa of the bladder or rectum.Stage IVa cervical carcinoma:Extension of the tumor into the mucosa of the bladder or rectum.Stage IVb cervical carcinoma:Spread of the tumor beyond the true pelvis and/or by metastasis into distant organs.

Finding abnormal cells during cervical cancer screenings is the best way to avoid cervical cancer. Cervical cancer diagnosis requires the following:


1. A PHYSICAL EXAM AND MEDICAL HISTORY
1. A physical exam and medical historyExamining the whole body to check general signs of health, including checking for any signs of disease, like lumps or anything unusual.Past medical history, individual’s health habits, and prior illnesses and treatments will also be taken.


2. PELVIC EXAM
2. Pelvic examAn exam of the vagina, cervix, uterus, fallopian tubes, ovaries, and rectum is done.A speculum (tool doctors use to gently open the vagina for internal examination) is inserted into the vagina to look for signs of disease.


3. TRADITIONAL PAP SMEAR
3. Traditional pap smear
Apap smear, also called a pap test, is a procedure to test for cervical cancer in women. It involves collecting cells from your cervix.


4. HPV TESTING
4. HPV testing
The HPV test is a screening test for cervical cancer. It doesn't confirm if an individual has cancer, instead, the test detects the presence of HPV, the virus that causes cervical cancer, in the system.


5. VISUAL INSPECTION WITH ACETIC ACID (VIA)
5. Visual inspection with acetic acid (VIA)
It is a visualization of a woman's cervix to detect precursors of cervical cancer after the application of acetic acid (ordinary table vinegar) on her cervix.


6. LIQUID-BASED CYTOLOGY (LBC)
6. Liquid-based cytology (LBC)
Liquid-based cytology (LBC) is a new method of preparing cervical samples for cytological examination and unlike the conventional 'smear' preparation.
It involves making a suspension of cells from the sample and this is used to produce a thin layer of cells on a slide.

7. COMPUTERIZED SCREENING
7. Computerized screening
Computer-assisted image analysis and artificial intelligence have been introduced to improve the Pap smear's sensitivity.
Artificial intelligence (AI) has also shown promising results in screening and examination based on image pattern recognition.


8. ENDOCERVICAL CURETTAGE
8. Endocervical curettage
This procedure collects cells or tissue from the cervical canal using a curette (spoon-shaped instrument).
Tissue samples are taken and checked under a microscope for any signs of cancer.


9. COLPOSCOPY
9. Colposcopy
A procedure in which a colposcope (a lighted, magnifying instrument) is used to check the vagina and cervix for abnormal areas.
Tissue samples may be taken using a curette (spoon-shaped instrument) or a brush and checked under a microscope for signs of disease.


10. BIOPSY
10. Biopsy
This is done if the pap smear shows any abnormal cells. A sample of tissue is cut from the cervix and viewed under a microscope by a pathologist to check for signs of cancer.

Get all your tests done with Tata 1mg for accurate and timely results.
Book Now

11.IMAGING
11.Imaging
These tests help doctors find out where the cancer is located and whether it has spread to other parts of the body. They include:Computed tomography (CT) scan:It involves taking pictures of the cervix at specific times after the intravenous (IV) injection of contrast medium to find out exactly where the tumor is in relation to nearby organs and blood vessels.

Positron emission tomography (PET) scan orPET-CT scan:A PET scan is usually combined with a CT scan or MRI scan to produce images of the inside of the body. The combination provides a more complete picture of the area being evaluated.

Women’s Cancer Awareness Package is a group of tests clubbed together to detect cancer markers in women. Get your lab tests done by our professionals in the comfort and safety of your house.
Book Now
CELEBS AFFECTED
Celebs affectedErin Andrews
Erin Jill Andrews is an American sportscaster, television personality, and actress. She was diagnosed with cervical cancer in 2016 and credits the experience for making her more vigilant about her health.
PREVENTION OF CERVICAL CANCER
Prevention Of Cervical Cancer

There are more than 100 kinds of HPV and about a dozen of them have been shown to lead to cancer. The two most important things to prevent cervical cancer are to get the HPV vaccine and to get tested regularly according to American Cancer Society (ACS) guidelines. These include:

1. UNDERGOING CERVICAL SCREENING
1. Undergoing cervical screening
Early detection of the types of HPV that can cause cancer is key to preventing cervical cancer.
A well-proven way to prevent cervical cancer is to have screening tests.


2. GETTING THE HPV VACCINE
2. Getting the HPV vaccine
The HPV vaccine can help prevent HPV infection by protecting against HPV.
These vaccines help prevent pre-cancers and cancers of the cervix.
Some HPV vaccines are also approved to help prevent other types of cancers and anal and genital warts.


India accounts for around 16% of the total deaths caused by cervical cancer across the world. And it can be prevented with a vaccine.
Book Your Vaccination Slot


3. LIMITING EXPOSURE TO HPV
3. Limiting exposure to HPV
Encourage the partners to talk with a doctor or nurse about the HPV vaccine.
Not having sex when there are visible warts
Limiting the number of sex partners
Avoiding sex with people who have had many other sexual partners


4. NOT HAVING UNPROTECTED SEX
4. Not having unprotected sex
Some methods used to prevent sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) decrease the risk of HPV infection.
The use of a barrier method of birth control, such as a condom and dental dams during oral, anal, and vaginal sex, can help protect against HPV infection.

Using condoms significantly reduces the risk of HPV (human papillomavirus) infections by providing a barrier that minimizes skin-to-skin contact during sexual activity.

Prioritize your health—choose condoms for protection and peace of mind.Buy Here
5. MAINTAINING A HEALTHY LIFESTYLE

5. Maintaining a healthy lifestyle
This may involve eating fruits and vegetables, exercising, quitting smoking, or taking vitamins or mineral supplements.

Vitamins and mineral supplements can help lower cancer risk. Take a step towards better health today.
Explore Supplements Now
DOCTOR TO VISIT
Doctor To Visit

Every kind of cancer requires comprehensive care that consists of a group of doctors. Doctors who take care of patients with cervical cancer and help in diagnosing and formulating a treatment plan are:

Gynecologist
Gynecologic oncologist
Radiation oncologist
Medical oncologist

Agynecologistspecializes in female reproductive health.

Agynecologic oncologistspecializes in cancers of the female reproductive system and can perform surgery and prescribe chemotherapy and other medicines.

Aradiation oncologistis a doctor who uses radiation to treat cancer.

Amedical oncologistuses chemotherapy and other medicines to treat cancer.

Worried about cervical cancer? Our trusted doctors are here to listen, guide, and answer all your questions with care.Consult Now
TREATMENT OF CERVICAL CANCER
Treatment Of Cervical Cancer

Different types of treatment are available for patients with cervical cancer. They include:


1. SURGICAL PROCEDURES
1. Surgical procedures
Conization:A procedure in which a cone-shaped piece of abnormal tissue is removed from the cervix.
Hysterectomy:A hysterectomy is a surgical procedure to remove the womb (uterus). A hysterectomy can be:
- Simple hysterectomy:It is the removal of the uterus and cervix.
-Radical hysterectomy:It is the removal of the uterus, cervix, upper vagina, and the tissue around the cervix. A  radical hysterectomy also includes the removal of the surrounding lymph nodes.

Loop electrosurgical excision procedure (LEEP):This procedure uses a wire loop heated by an electric current to remove cells and tissue in the cervix and vagina. It is used as part of the diagnosis and treatment for abnormal or cancerous conditions.

Exenteration:This surgery is done if cancer has come back within the pelvis (the lowest part of your tummy, between your hips). This procedure removes the cervix, uterus, and ovaries.

Radical trachelectomy:It is a surgery to remove the cervix, nearby tissue and lymph nodes, and the upper part of the vagina. It can be used to treat women with early-stage cervical cancer to preserve their fertility. After the cervix is removed, the uterus is attached to the remaining part of the vagina.

Bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy:This is a surgical procedure to remove both the ovaries and fallopian tubes. It is done at the same time as a hysterectomy.

Considering a Second Opinion for Cancer?
Understand its importance and key factors to consider before making a decision.
Read More Here

2. RADIATION THERAPY
2. Radiation therapy
Uses high-energy X-rays or other particles to destroy cancer cells. Radiation therapy may be given alone, before surgery, or instead of surgery to shrink the tumor. The types of radiation therapy include:

External-beam radiation therapy:The most common type of radiation in which the radiation is given from a machine outside the body.

Internal-beam radiation therapy:When radiation treatment is given using implants, it is called internal radiation therapy or brachytherapy. Brachytherapy involves the application of a radioactive source near the tumor.

Note:For the early stages of cervical cancer, a combination of radiation therapy and low-dose weekly chemotherapy is often used. This is done to increase the effectiveness of the radiation treatment.


3. CHEMOTHERAPY
3. Chemotherapy
Chemotherapy is the use of drugs to destroy cancer cells, usually by keeping the cancer cells from growing, dividing, and making more cells. The chemo drugs most often used include:CisplatinCarboplatinPaclitaxel(Taxol)Topotecan

Order genuine medicines at the best prices and get them delivered to your doorstep.
Get Medicines With Tata 1mg

4. TARGETED THERAPY
4. Targeted therapy
In this treatment, specific genes, proteins, or the tissue environment that contributes to cancer growth and survival are targeted. Targeted therapy uses the following:Bevacizumab(Avastin)Bevacizumab-awwb (Mvasi)Bevacizumab-bvzr (Zirabev)Tisotumab vedotin (HuMax-TF)


5. IMMUNOTHERAPY
5. Immunotherapy
This therapy uses the body's natural defenses to fight cancer by improving your immune system’s ability to attack cancer cells.
The immune checkpoint inhibitorpembrolizumab(Keytruda) is used to treat cervical cancer that has recurred or metastasized during or after treatment with chemotherapy.
It may also be used with chemotherapy with or without bevacizumab in people with recurrent or metastatic cervical cancer.

New Breakthrough in Cancer Care.
Researchers at Tata Memorial Centre introduce a novel nutraceutical aimed at reducing treatment toxicity and lowering cancer recurrence rates.
Know More
HOME-CARE FOR CERVICAL CANCER
Home-care For Cervical Cancer

Certain home-remedies can help manage symptoms of cervical cancer as an adjunct but should not replace conventional cancer treatment. Always consult your doctor first. These include:

Basil (Tulsi):Contains compounds that may exhibit anti-cancer properties.

Buy premium quality tulsi products
Here

Clove(Laung):Contains eugenol, which has been studied for its potential anti-cancer properties.

Garlic(Adrak):Rich in organosulfur compounds, which have been associated with reduced cancer risk.

Rosemary (Gulmehendi):Contains antioxidants like carnosic acid and rosmarinic acid, which may have anti-cancer effects.

Saffron (Kesar):Contains an element called crocin, which has shown potential anti-cancer properties.

Note:Further research is needed to understand their anti-cancer effects fully.

COMPLICATIONS OF CERVICAL CANCER
Complications Of Cervical Cancer

Cervical cancer complications are seen in advanced disease and associated treatments and are similar to other cancers. They may include:

Kidney failure:Kidney involvement typically occurs in the more advanced stages of cervical cancer. Kidney failure in cervical cancer can often be associated with blockage of the ureters.
Hydronephrosis:This is the swelling of a kidney due to a build-up of urine. It represents an advanced disease in patients with cervical cancer, as it indicates the involvement of the parametria.Lymphedema:It refers to tissue swelling caused by an accumulation of protein-rich fluid that's usually drained through the body's lymphatic system.
Blood clots:Large cervical tumors can also put pressure on the veins in the leg, helping clots to form.
Fistulas:A fistula is an abnormal connection between two body parts, such as an organ or blood vessel, and another structure.
Orbital apex syndrome (OAS) and blindness:OAS, a rare condition linked to malignant mixed Müllerian tumors, involves optic nerve damage when cancer spreads to the eye.

Prevention is better than cure.
HPV vaccine can be your shield against cervical cancer.
Learn How
ALTERNATIVE THERAPIES FOR CERVICAL CANCER
Alternative Therapies For Cervical Cancer

When exploring alternative treatments for cervical cancer, always consult your medical team, as some may conflict with your treatment plan. Common alternatives include:
1. HOMEOPATHY
1. Homeopathy
Homeopathy is considered a complementary approach that may help manage symptoms and improve overall well-being in cervical cancer patients.
It should always be used alongside conventional treatments under medical guidance.


2. ACUPUNCTURE
2. Acupuncture
It e is recommended for cancer pain relief, with studies showing its benefits and minimal side effects.
However, more research is needed to assess its effectiveness for cervical cancer pain specifically.

LIVING WITH CERVICAL CANCER
Living With Cervical Cancer

Cancer impacts physical, emotional, social, and financial well-being, making it a challenge for patients and families. For some, cancer may persist, requiring ongoing care. Here are tips to cope:
1. GIVE IMPORTANCE TO PALLIATIVE CARE
1. Give importance to palliative care
Palliative care focuses on improving how you feel during treatment by managing symptoms and supporting patients and their families with other, non-medical needs. Palliative treatments vary widely and often include:
Medication to relieve the symptoms
Nutritional changes
Relaxation techniques
Emotional and spiritual support
Encouraging the patient to do things they love.


2. FOLLOW UP REGULARLY
2. Follow up regularly
Most doctors recommend that women treated for cervical cancer keep getting regular Pap tests no matter how they were treated (surgery or radiation).
Survivors of cervical cancer should be vigilant for early detection of any other cancer, such as breast, lung, and colorectal cancer.
Imaging tests may be done if the signs or symptoms of cancer come back.


3. MANAGE THE PHYSICAL SYMPTOMS OF ADVANCED CANCER
3. Manage the physical symptoms of advanced cancer
Advanced cervical cancer means cancer that has spread to other areas of your body, such as the liver or lungs. Unfortunately, advanced cancer can't usually be cured.
However, treatment can often control cancer and relieve symptoms.Walking May Improve Quality Of Life For People With Advanced Cancer.
The American Cancer Society recommends brisk walking for at least 150 minutes or any vigorous-intensity activity for 75 minutes for every adult each week to stay healthy. Read how wailing can help you if you have cancer.
Click Now
4. FOCUS ON EMOTIONAL AND MENTAL WELLBEING
4. Focus on emotional and mental wellbeing
Fear and anxiety related to cancer or the ongoing treatment can be managed by:
Talking about advanced cancer
Sharing feelings with close family members and friends
Getting all the information needed to go about with the treatment
Understanding the physical limitations
Managing the sexual relationship by talking to the partner
Coping with practical issues like:
Financial expenses
Childcare
Work issues


5. SUPERVISE THE COST OF CANCER CARE
5. Supervise the cost of cancer care
Cancer treatment can be expensive and coping financially can become a source of stress and anxiety for patients and their families.
In addition to treatment costs, there might be extra unplanned expenses as well. This can stop many patients from continuing the treatment.
This can be managed by asking the social worker about benefits or grants, they can also help with the claiming process.


TIPS FOR CAREGIVERS
Tips for caregivers
Encouraging and providing mental support to the patient
Understanding the course of treatment
Helping the patient manage their symptoms and side effects
Coordinating their medical appointments and giving medications on time
Assisting the patient in maintaining personal care and hygiene
Talking with empathy and a positive attitude toward the patient
Helping the patients with household chores
Handling insurance and billing issues for them.Did our information help you?In our relentless endeavour to keep improving our services, you are our eyes. Kindly take out sometime to guide us on how to serve your better.Share your feedbackSubscribe to stay informedSubscribe to our carefully crafted informative emailers by Medical Experts and be the first to get the latest health news, tips and important updates.SubmitDisclaimerTata 1mg's sole intention is to ensure that its consumers get information that is expert-reviewed, accurate and trustworthy. However, the information contained herein should NOT be used as a substitute for the advice of a qualified physician. The information provided here is for informational purposes only. This may not cover all possible side effects, drug interactions or warnings or alerts. Please consult your doctor and discuss all your queries related to any disease or medicine. We intend to support, not replace, the doctor-patient relationship.

--- REFERENCES ---

- Zhang S, Xu H, Zhang L, Qiao Y. Cervical cancer: Epidemiology, risk factors and screening. Chin J Cancer Res. 2020 Dec 31.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7797226/#:~:text=Cervical)
- What Is Cervical Cancer? About Cervical Cancer. American Society of Cancer.  (https://www.cancer.org/cancer/cervical-cancer/about/what-is-cervical-cancer.html )
- Kashyap N, Krishnan N, Kaur S, Ghai S. Risk Factors of Cervical Cancer: A Case-Control Study. Asia Pac J Oncol Nurs. 2019 Jul-Sep.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6518992/ )
- International Collaboration of Epidemiological Studies of Cervical Cancer, Appleby P, Beral V, et al. Cervical cancer and hormonal contraceptives: collaborative reanalysis of individual data for 16,573 women with cervical cancer and 35,509 women without cervical cancer from 24 epidemiological studies. Lancet. 2007.  (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17993361/ )
- Panagiotis Tsikouras1, Stefanos Zervoudis, et al. Cervical cancer: screening, diagnosis and staging. JBUON 2016; 21(2).  (https://jbuon.com/archive/21-2-320.pdf )
- Ronco G, Cuzick J, Pierotti P, Cariaggi MP, Dalla Palma P, Naldoni C, Ghiringhello B, Giorgi-Rossi P, Minucci D, Parisio F, Pojer A, Schiboni ML, Sintoni C, Zorzi M, Segnan N, Confortini M. Accuracy of liquid based versus conventional cytology: overall results of new technologies for cervical cancer screening: randomized controlled trial. BMJ. 2007 Jul 7.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1910655/)
- How Is Cervical Cancer Treated? Cervical Cancer: Types of Treatment. Cancer. Net. Jan 2022.  (https://www.cancer.net/cancer-types/cervical-cancer/types-treatment)
- Cervical Cancer Treatment (PDQ®)–Patient Version. Cervical Cancer. National Cancer Institute. Apr 2022.  (https://www.cancer.gov/types/cervical/patient/cervical-treatment-pdq)
- Banerjee R, Kamrava M. Brachytherapy in the treatment of cervical cancer: a review. Int J Womens Health. 2014 May 28.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4045176/ )
- Fowler JR, Maani EV, Jack BW. Cervical Cancer. [Updated 2022 Apr 5]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2022 Jan.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK431093/ )
- Wadhwani M, Phuljhele S, Kumar R, Shameer A. Cervical carcinoma leading to orbital apex syndrome and blindness. BMJ Case Rep. 2019 Mar  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6398740/ )
- Meng FF, Feng YH. A pilot study of acupuncture at pain acupoints for cervical cancer pain. Medicine (Baltimore).  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6314748/#:~:text=Acupuncture)
- Sreedevi A, Javed R, Dinesh A. Epidemiology of cervical cancer with special focus on India. Int J Womens Health. 2015 Apr 16.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4404964/)
- Bobdey S, Sathwara J, Jain A, Balasubramaniam G. Burden of cervical cancer and role of screening in India. Indian J Med Paediatr Oncol. 2016 Oct-Dec.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5234166/)
- UCHealth. Advice from Erin Andrews, famous NFL sideline reporter [Internet]. 2021 Feb 4 [cited 2025 Jan 6]. Available from:  (https://www.uchealth.org/today/advice-from-erin-andrews-famous-nfl-sideline-reporter/ )
