https://www.1mg.com/diseases/chickenpox-288#

CHICKENPOX
ChickenpoxAlso known as Varicella
OVERVIEW
Overview
Chickenpox is a highly contagious viral infection caused by the varicella-zoster virus also known as the chickenpox virus. It leads to an itchy rash with fluid-filled blisters, along withfeverand fatigue. It is a highly contagious virus that spreads through direct contact, respiratory droplets, or touching contaminated surfaces.

The incubation period of chickenpox is typically 10 to 21 days after exposure. It usually affects children but can also affect adults. Those at higher risk include unvaccinated individuals, infants, pregnant women, and people with weakened immune systems.

To prevent the spread of chickenpox, avoid close contact with infected individuals, practice good hygiene, and get vaccinated. The treatment of chickenpox is mostly centered around managing the symptoms. It includes rest, hydration, antihistamines for itching, and pain relievers to reduce fever, while severe cases may require antiviral medications.
KEY FACTS
Key FactsUsually seen inChildren below 10 years of ageGender affectedBoth men & womenBody part(s) involvedSkinMimicking ConditionsInsect bitesImpetigoDrug reactionsDermatitis herpetiformisUrticariaViral exanthemsPityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acutaHerpes simplex viral infectionAtypical herpes zosterRickettsial diseaseNeonatal syphilisErythema multiformeContact dermatitisNecessary health tests/imagingPolymerase chain reaction (PCR)Varicella zoster IgG testVaricella zoster IgM testTreatmentAntipyretics:ParacetamolAntivirals:Acyclovir,Famciclovir,Ganciclovir,Ribavirin,Valacyclovir
Specialists to consultPediatrician (in case of children)DermatologistInfectious Disease SpecialistInternal Medicine Specialist
SYMPTOMS OF CHIKENPOX
Symptoms Of Chikenpox


The symptoms caused by chickenpox infection appear 10 to 21 days after exposure to the virus and usually last about 5 to 10 days. The initial symptoms may resemble any other infection.

At the beginning of chickenpox, a person may begin to feel unwell followed by the appearance of the classic rash of chickenpox after a day or two. One is contagious to close contact up to 48 hours before the skin rash starts to occur.

The common non-rash symptoms of chickenpox are as follows:
A feverthat usually lasts for 3-5 days and is in the range of 101°–102°F (38.3°–38.8°C).
Fatigue ortiredness
Malaise which is the general feeling of being unwell
Loss of appetite
Headache
Muscle orjoint pain
Flu-like symptoms such as a cough or runny nose

Once the chickenpox rash and blisters appear on the body, they go through the following three phases:


Red or pink-looking bumps (papules):These are often first noted on the stomach, chest, back, or face areas, which then spread throughout the body.
Blisters (vesicles):The bumps eventually get filled up with fluid, forming blisters that begin to break open and leak.
Crusting or scabbing:The blisters develop a crust, and scab, and begin to heal.

In severe cases of chickenpox rashes and blisters start spreading throughout the body. In some cases, small lesions may even form on the throat, around the eyes, and in the mucus membranes of the urethra, vagina or anus.Did you know?
Chickenpox andshinglesare caused by the same virus (Varicella-Zoster Virus), which can reactivate later in life as shingles.
Protect yourself and your loved ones with Tata 1mg's home vaccination service, ensuring safety and convenience at your doorstep.Book Your Vaccination Today
CAUSES OF CHICKENPOX
Causes Of Chickenpox


Chickenpox is caused by the virus varicella zoster. It mostly spreads due to close contact with an infected person. The virus can spread through:
Coughing or sneezingvia respiratory droplets
Kissing or sharingdrinks or food through saliva
Handshaking or huggingthrough contact with the blisters or the fluid on the skin
Touching contaminated surfaceslike door handles or tables, etcIs chickenpox contagious?
Chickenpox is contagious from a day or two before the symptoms start to appear till the blisters become dry and have crusted over. Hence, avoid touching the person who is infected as this can increase your risk of infection. It usually takes a week or two for the blisters to dry and disappear completely.

Know more about how the virus spreads and the ways to prevent it.Read Article Here
RISK FACTORS FOR CHICKENPOX
Risk Factors For Chickenpox


You may be at high risk of getting infected with the chickenpox virus if you have not contracted the infection in your life. Other risk factors include:

Age:The risk of chickenpox is higher for children under 12 and adults over 50 years of age.
Non-immunity:Individuals who have not been vaccinated or had prior infection are at a higher risk.
Exposure:Close contact with infected individuals raises the risk.
Weakened immunity:Decreased immunity due toHIV infection/AIDS or chemotherapy reduces defence.
Pregnancy:Increased risk and a higher chance of complications if infected while pregnant.
Environment:Higher exposure risk in schools, childcare, healthcare, or high-prevalence areas.
Seasonal trend:More common in late winter and early spring.
Occupation:Certain jobs or travel to high-risk areas increase susceptibility.
DIAGNOSIS OF CHICKENPOX
Diagnosis Of Chickenpox


Chickenpox is usually easy to recognise and diagnose due to its classic skin rashes.

However, if required, a confirmatory test bypolymerase chain reaction (PCR)testing can be done. For this, the blister fluid or scabs are tested for the presence of the virus.

Moreover, tests for antibodies may be performed to determine if immunity is present against chickenpox. These include:
Varicella Zoster IgG testis used to evaluate the level of antibodies IgG produced by the immune system to fight against varicella-zoster virus.
Varicella zoster IgM testis performed to diagnose chickenpox and to distinguish between a recent, current, or old infection.

Take charge of your health today! Book your tests with Tata 1mg for accurate results and hassle-free home sample collection.
Schedule Now

CELEBS AFFECTED
Celebs affectedIshan KhatterIn 2019, Bollywood actor Ishan Khatter shared about his recovery from chickenpox on Instagram.Barkha SenguptaTV fame Barkha Sengupta, known for her role in the serial “Naamkaran” posted on instagram in 2019 that she was down with chickenpox and recovering from it.
PREVENTION OF CHICKENPOX
Prevention Of Chickenpox


The most effective way to prevent chickenpox is through vaccination, which is included in childhood immunization programs in many countries.
VACCINE
Vaccine
Children under 13 years should get two doses of the chickenpox vaccine: the first at 12–15 months and the second at 4–6 years.
Individuals above 13 years who have never had chickenpox or the vaccine should get two doses at least 28 days apart.


Planning to get vaccinated for chickenpox?
Learn More About Vaccine

OTHER WAYS TO PREVENT THE SPREAD
Other ways to prevent the spread
Isolate those infected to prevent the spread of infection
Wash hands frequently, especially before eating, after using the restroom, and upon returning home.
Keep fingernails clean and short to reduce the risk of skin infections and scarring.


Maintain hand hygiene with our extensive range of handwashes and sanitizers to keep germs and infections at bay.
Fill Your Cart Now
SPECIALIST TO VISIT
Specialist To Visit


In most cases, the symptoms of chickenpox are usually mild and often go away on their own. In addition to a general physician, the specialists who can help treat this condition are:
Pediatrician (in case of children)DermatologistInternal medicine specialistInfectious disease specialist


Apediatricianprovides diagnosis, symptom management, and vaccination guidance for children with chickenpox.


Adermatologisthelps manage skin irritation, itching, and prevents scarring from chickenpox lesions.


Aninternal medicine specialistmonitors and treats complications in adults, especially those with underlying conditions.


Aninfectious disease specialistmanages severe or high-risk cases, especially in immunocompromised individuals.

When to see a doctor?
You must see a doctor if you experience symptoms such as:VomitingShortness of breathRash on the eyesStiffness of neckHigh fever (over 102 F)Bacterial infectionLoss of muscle controlDizziness


Do not neglect these symptoms and get expert guidance to prevent complications.
Consult Now
TREATMENT OF CHICKENPOX
Treatment Of Chickenpox


Chickenpox usually runs its course in a week or 10 days. The treatment is mostly aimed at relieving the symptoms. Non Aspirin products such asParacetamolcan be taken to reduce fever.

In adults and those with severe symptoms of chickenpox, doctors might prescribe antiviral medication as it can make the symptoms less severe and improve the condition. However, ensure to follow the course of the treatment and do not self-medicate. Some of the common antivirals used include:AcyclovirFamciclovirGanciclovirRibavirinValacyclovir
Do’s and Don’ts
As a protective measure, those infected are usually required to stay at home while they are infectious.
It is advised to not use OTC medications such as aspirin for fever as it is associated with Reye’s syndrome in kids. It is a severe disease that affects the brain and may even cause death.
Avoid the use of anti-inflammatory painkillers without consulting your doctor as it can increase the risk of severe skin infections.
Daily cleansing with warm water will help avoid secondary bacterial infection.
Keeping nails short and wearing gloves may prevent scratching and reduce the risk of secondary infections.Applying gentle, fragrance-free moisturizers helps soothe itching and prevent skin dryness during chickenpox.

Buy Body Lotions Here
HOME CARE FOR CHICKENPOX
Home Care For Chickenpox


Proper home care can help relieve chickenpox symptoms, prevent complications, and promote faster healing. Tips that can help include:
1. DO NOT SCRATCH THE ITCH
1. Do not scratch the itch
One of the key symptoms of chickenpox is itchy skin and hence, it is advised to avoid scratching.
This is because it not only increases the risk of scars but also can lead to infection.
As a safety measure, you can trim the fingernails, tap or pat on the itchy skin, and apply moisturizer to get some relief.


Keep your skin hydrated and healthy! Shop the best dry skin care products at Tata 1mg.
Click Here
2. USE A COLD COMPRESS
2. Use a cold compress
A cold compress not only helps in lowering the body temperature during fever but also soothes itchy skin.
Apply a cool, damp compress over the itchy area as it acts as one of the effective chickenpox remedies.


3. EAT HEALTHY
3. Eat healthy
Opt for home-cooked foods, preferably bland foods, to improve the healing process.
Also, up your intake of fruits that are rich in Vitamin C and boost immunity such as oranges, apples, grapes, lemons, etc.
Focus on a well-balanced diet.


4. STAY HYDRATED
4. Stay hydrated
Drink lots of fluids as it helps you to stay hydrated and prevent dehydration caused due to high fever.
Moreover, it can also help to flush the viral toxins from the body and aid in quick recovery. Avoid drinking sugary beverages and opt for fresh, plain water, especially if you or your kid has sores in the mouth.
You can opt for sugar-free popsicles or hydrating fruits like cucumber or watermelon to replenish fluid stores in the body.


5. WEAR GLOVES
5. Wear gloves
It is advised, especially for kids, to put gloves or socks over their hands to prevent scratching.
This can not only prevent the direct content of the nail with the chickenpox blister but also lower the risk of infections and limit scarring.
Also, wear loose, cotton clothes, which will help the skin to breathe and ease the itching.


6. AVOID SELF-MEDICATION
6. Avoid self-medication
Most people tend to pop a pill for fever or a painkiller for body aches without a second thought when suffering from chickenpox.
Aspirin, which is commonly used to relieve fever, can cause a deadly condition known as Reye’s syndrome in children below 16 years of age.
Hence, do not self-medicate but consult your doctor before taking any pills.

COMPLICATIONS OF CHICKENPOX
Complications Of Chickenpox


Chickenpox is usually a mild disease. Some of the serious complications of chickenpox include:Secondary bacterial infectionsDehydrationPneumonia(infection of the lungs)Encephalitis(inflammation and swelling of the brain)Cerebellar ataxia (defective muscular coordination)Transverse myelitis (inflammation of the spinal cord)BleedingSepsisToxic shock syndromeReye's syndrome in children and teenagers who take aspirin during chickenpox


CHICKENPOX AND SHINGLES
Chickenpox And Shingles
Although shingles and chickenpox are caused by the same virus, they are not the same illness.
Chickenpox is usually a milder illness that affects children.
Shingles result from a reactivation of the virus long after the chickenpox illness has disappeared.
The chickenpox virus stays in the body even after recovery.
Later in life, the virus can reactivate and cause shingles.
If you have shingles, you can spread the varicella virus to people who have never had chickenpox or never received the chickenpox vaccine.
These people will develop chickenpox, not shingles.
It takes from 10 to 21 days after exposure to chickenpox or shingles for someone to develop chickenpox.

Discover the link between shingles and chickenpox and why vaccination matters.
Read More
ALTERNATIVE THERAPIES OF CHICKENPOX
Alternative Therapies Of Chickenpox


In addition to antiviral medications, few natural remedies are known to help relieve the symptoms and help to get rid of scars caused due to scratching. However, make sure to consult your doctor before you try any of these chickenpox remedies.
1. OATMEAL BATH
1. Oatmeal bath
Oatmeal bath is one of the most popular natural remedies to relieve itchy skin caused due to chickenpox.
For this, you need to cook two cups of oatmeal in two liters of water for around 15 minutes. Now, let it cool, tie the cooked oatmeal to a cotton cloth, and allow it to float in a tub of warm water till the water becomes turbid.
Splash this water all over the body to soothe itching.


2. BAKING SODA
2. Baking soda
This is also quite commonly used to get rid of itching in people with chickenpox.
Add 1/4th teaspoon of baking soda to a glass of water.
Dip a soft, cotton cloth in it and dab it on the skin such that the baking soda dries on the skin. This can keep you away from scratching the blisters.


3. VITAMIN E OIL
3. Vitamin E oil
Rich in antioxidants,Vitamin Eoil can help to relieve itching as well as prevent scars caused due to scratching of chickenpox blisters.
Gently apply Vitamin E oil all over the skin as it exerts a calming and soothing effect on the skin and thus, promotes healing.
Moreover, regular application of this oil was found to lighten the scars/marks caused due to chickenpox.Did our information help you?In our relentless endeavour to keep improving our services, you are our eyes. Kindly take out sometime to guide us on how to serve your better.Share your feedbackSubscribe to stay informedSubscribe to our carefully crafted informative emailers by Medical Experts and be the first to get the latest health news, tips and important updates.SubmitDisclaimerTata 1mg's sole intention is to ensure that its consumers get information that is expert-reviewed, accurate and trustworthy. However, the information contained herein should NOT be used as a substitute for the advice of a qualified physician. The information provided here is for informational purposes only. This may not cover all possible side effects, drug interactions or warnings or alerts. Please consult your doctor and discuss all your queries related to any disease or medicine. We intend to support, not replace, the doctor-patient relationship.

--- REFERENCES ---

- Ayoade F, Kumar S. Varicella Zoster. [Updated 2021 Aug 11]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2021 Jan.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK448191/)
- InformedHealth.org [Internet]. Cologne, Germany: Institute for Quality and Efficiency in Health Care (IQWiG); 2006-. Chickenpox: Overview. 2014 Jun 30 [Updated 2019 Nov 21].  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK279621/)
- Cohen J, Breuer J. Chickenpox: treatment. BMJ Clin Evid. 2015;2015:0912. Published 2015 Jun 15.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4468609/)
- Facts about chickenpox. Paediatr Child Health. 2005;10(7):413-414.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2722564/)
- Kota V, Grella MJ. Varicella (Chickenpox) Vaccine. [Updated 2021 Feb 16]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2021 Jan.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK441946/)
- Chickenpox (Varicella). Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).  (https://www.cdc.gov/chickenpox/index.html)
- How to care for children with chickenpox. American Academy of Dermatology.  (https://www.aad.org/public/diseases/contagious-skin-diseases/chickenpox)
- Prevention and Treatment. Chickenpox (Varicella). Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).  (https://www.cdc.gov/chickenpox/about/prevention-treatment.html)
- Nature Cure for Children. H K Bakhru. Jaico Publishing House, 1999. 304 p.  (https://books.google.co.in/books?id=hXguoGZSdh0C&pg=PT133&lpg=PT133&dq=Bakhru+chickenpox&source=bl&ots=7Kf8l6PIT5&sig=ACfU3U3C_l4lvHaRmWo89rlFNIcmud_WtQ&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwio7oiGjtbgAhVTVH0KHdGbAyQQ6AEwD3oECAIQAQ#v=onepage&q=chickenpox&f=false)
- Natural Home Remedies for Common Ailments. H K Bakhru. Orient Paperbacks, 1996. 232  (https://books.google.co.in/books?id=mLMCnwomGCsC&pg=PA45&lpg=PA45&dq=Bakhru+chickenpox&source=bl&ots=2Fd8LZqsGB&sig=ACfU3U19ugtWGe2P8y_R9LChWMpBwaO2dA&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwio7oiGjtbgAhVTVH0KHdGbAyQQ6AEwC3oECAcQAQ#v=onepage&q=Bakhru%20chickenpox&f=false)
- Greenaway C, Boivin JF, Cnossen S, Rossi C, Tapiero B, Schwartzman K, Olson S, Miller M. Risk factors for susceptibility to varicella in newly arrived adult migrants in Canada. Epidemiol Infect. 2014 Aug;142(8):1695-707. Available from:  (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9151238 )
- Breuer J, Fifer H. Chickenpox. BMJ Clin Evid. 2011 Apr 11;2011:0912. Available from:  (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3275319/ )
- Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Chickenpox vaccination [Internet]. Atlanta, GA: CDC; [cited 2025 Feb 12]. Available from:  (https://www.cdc.gov/chickenpox/vaccines/index.html)
- Keen MA, Hassan I. Vitamin E in dermatology. Indian Dermatol Online J. 2016 Jul-Aug;7(4):311-5. Available from:  (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4976416/ )
