https://www.1mg.com/diseases/dementia-801#

DEMENTIA
DementiaAlso known as Memory Loss or Forgetfulness
OVERVIEW
Overview
Dementia is a progressive, chronic brain condition that leads to loss of memory, ability to think, and behavioral disturbances. In severe cases, it can also impact the ability to perform simple day-to-day activities.

Dementia causes memory loss, confusion, difficulty in problem-solving, and mood changes, affecting daily life. Aging, family history, cardiovascular diseases, brain injuries, and lifestyle factors like poor diet and inactivity can increase the risk of dementia


Dementia has no cure, but treatments like medications, cognitive therapy, and lifestyle changes can help manage symptoms. A healthy diet, regular exercise, and social engagement may slow progression and improve quality of life.
KEY FACTS
Key FactsUsually seen inAdults above 65 years of ageGender affectedBoth men and women but more common in womenBody part(s) involvedBrainPrevalenceWorldwide: 50 Million (2020)India: 4.1 million (2019)Mimicking ConditionsDepressionDeliriumMild cognitive impairmentsStressSenilityNutritional deficiencyNecessary health tests/imagingBlood tests:Thyroid profile total,Vitamin B-12,Vitamin D (25-OH,Complete blood count (CBC),Erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and Protein electrophoresis CSF.Imaging studies:CT scan (head),MRI brain, MR angiography brain, andCT angiography brain.Other tests:EEG (Electroencephalography),Electrocardiography (ECG), andEchocardiography.TreatmentAcetylcholinesterase inhibitors:Donepezil,Galantamine, andRivastigmine.Nerve-protecting medicine:Citicoline.N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) agonists:Memantine.Antioxidant drugs:Coenzyme Q10,Ginkgo biloba, etc.Nootropic drug:Piracetam.Cyclooxygenase (COX) inhibitors:Ibuprofen.Statins:Atorvastatin.Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs):FluoxetineorSertraline.Benzodiazepines:Lorazepam.Antipsychotic medications:Quetiapine.Supportive medications:Vitamin supplements, Antidiabetics, Antihypertensive, Antibiotics and Anti-inflammatory drugs.Specialists to consultGeneral physicianNeurologistsNeuro-psychologistsPsychiatristsRelated NGOsAlzheimer's and Related Disorders Society of India (ARDSI)See All
SYMPTOMS OF DEMENTIA
Symptoms Of Dementia


A person can be suspected to have dementia if he/she exhibits the following symptoms:
Progressive memory loss may start as simple forgetfulness and gradually increase to an extent where the person cannot recollect vital information, such as his/her name, address, etc.
Problems in performing basic tasks, such as grooming, wearing clothes, eating, etc., that he/she could complete with ease previously.
Difficulty establishing new memories and learning new things.
Loss of ability to communicate effectively. The individual may struggle to remember even simple words.
The individual is often confused and disoriented.Other psychological symptoms, such asanxiety,depression, inappropriate behavior, paranoia, and hallucinations, may also be present.


Note:Worldwide, around 50 million people have dementia, and this number is expected to hit 152 million by 2050. Although there are many types of dementia, Alzheimer's disease-associated dementia is the most common and accounts for 60-70% of all cases.

Know more about the early warning signs of Alzheimer's disease.
Read This
TYPES OF DEMENTIA
Types Of Dementia

There are many types of dementia and results in various neurological disorders like :
1. DEMENTIA OF ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE
1. Dementia of Alzheimer’s disease
This is the most common type of dementia, caused by harmful protein buildup in the brain that damages nerve cells. This leads to memory loss, confusion, and difficulty in thinking.


2. FRONTO-TEMPORAL DEMENTIA
2. Fronto-temporal dementia
Degeneration of nerve cells in the brain’s frontal and temporal lobes leads to this type of dementia. It is associated with personality changes, mood alterations, and abnormal behavior.


3. VASCULAR DEMENTIA
3. Vascular dementia
It happens when astroke, injury, or abnormal blood pressure hamper the blood supply to the brain. It leads to memory problems, resulting in cognitive decline.


4. LEWY-BODY DEMENTIA
4. Lewy-body dementia
Lewy bodies are abnormal clumps of protein found in the brain in neurological diseases like Alzheimer’s or Parkinson’s disease. This type of dementia is associated with stiffness and rigidity in the body and slow, uncoordinated movements.


5. MIXED DEMENTIA
5. Mixed dementia
This is a type of dementia that occurs due to an overlap of different causes.


6. PROGRESSIVE DEMENTIA
6. Progressive dementia
All the types of dementia mentioned earlier gradually worsen over time, starting with mild symptoms that slowly become more severe.


7. REVERSIBLE TYPE DEMENTIA
7. Reversible type dementia
It is a type of dementia in which there is a cognitive decline caused by underlying conditions like vitamin deficiencies, infections, or due to side effects from medications which can improve with proper treatment.
CAUSES OF DEMENTIA
Causes Of Dementia


The way dementia affects the brain depends on its type. Most types, except vascular dementia, occur due to the buildup of certain proteins in the brain.
Alzheimer’s disease happens due to shrinkage of the brain and the accumulation of clumps of proteins, which damage brain cells.
Lewy body dementia & Parkinson’s disease dementia result from clumps of alpha-synuclein protein (Lewy bodies) inside brain cells.
Frontotemporal dementia is linked to genetic mutations that cause protein buildup in the frontal and temporal lobes of the brain.
Huntington’s disease is an inherited condition caused by a faulty gene that causes brain cell damage.


Take charge of your brain health! Explore trusted natural mind care range to support overall cognitive function.
Shop Now
RISK FACTORS FOR DEMENTIA
Risk Factors For Dementia


Certain factors are known to increase the risk of dementia, such as:
1. AGE
1. Age
The risk of dementia increases with increasing age, especially after 65 years. However, it is important to understand that it is not a part of the normal aging process.


2. FAMILY HISTORY
2. Family history
Chances of dementia are higher if a close family member suffers from dementia due to the same genetic sequencing.


3. CHRONIC ILLNESS OR DISEASES
3. Chronic illness or diseases
Comorbid conditions likediabetes,hypertension, etc., can increase the risk of dementia.


4. NUTRITIONAL DEFICIENCIES
4. Nutritional deficiencies
A diet deficient in vitamin B complex can increase the risk of dementia.

Don't let a vitamin deficiency take a toll on your health. Bridge the gap with our extensive range of vitamin supplements.
Shop Now

5. ALCOHOL ABUSE
5. Alcohol abuse
Excessive alcohol consumption can increase the risk of dementia.


6. MEDICATIONS
6. Medications
Certain antidepressant medications like amitriptyline, and anti-allergy medications like diphenhydramine, benzodiazepines, anticholinergics, and opioids may increase the risk of dementia.Did you know risk factors of heart disease can put you at risk of Alzheimer’s?
These include a sedentary lifestyle, obesity, smoking, hypertension (high blood pressure), high blood cholesterol, and uncontrolled type 2 diabetes. Scientists believe that for most people, Alzheimer’s disease is caused by a combination of genetic, lifestyle, and environmental factors that affect the brain over time.
DIAGNOSIS OF DEMENTIA
Diagnosis Of Dementia


To evaluate a person with memory loss, the doctor takes a detailed history of the onset of symptoms, notes family history, and evaluates the patient's neurological and psychological condition with physical and cognitive assessments. Certain supporting lab tests and imaging studies may be required to establish the cause of dementia. They include:
1. BLOOD TESTS
1. Blood tests
Thyroid profile total:It helps detect thyroid imbalances which can cause cognitive issues similar to that of dementia.


Vitamin B-12:This test identifies vitamin B-12 deficiency-linked memory problems and neurological decline.


Vitamin D (25-OH):It assesses deficiency, which may contribute to cognitive impairment.


Complete blood count (CBC):This test is used to check for infections or anemia that can affect brain function.


Erythrocyte sedimentation rate:It detects inflammation, which may be linked to dementia-like symptoms.


Protein electrophoresis CSF:It helps identify abnormal proteins in cerebrospinal fluid (a clear liquid that surrounds and protects the brain and spinal cord) associated with neurodegenerative diseases.


2. IMAGING STUDIES
2. Imaging studies
CT scan (head):This test gets clear images of the brain and helps detect brain shrinkage, strokes, or structural abnormalities linked to dementia.


MRI brain:It provides detailed images of brain tissue to identify atrophy, strokes, or other dementia-related changes.


MR angiography brain:It examines blood vessels in the brain to check for blockages or reduced blood flow, which can contribute to vascular dementia.


CT angiography brain:This test uses contrast dye to visualize blood vessels and detect vascular issues that may cause dementia symptoms.

3. OTHER TESTS
3. Other tests
EEG (Electroencephalography),Electrocardiography (ECG), andEchocardiographymay be required to evaluate brain and heart activity.


Get accurate and reliable lab test results with Tata 1mg—trusted by millions for quality healthcare. Enjoy the convenience of home sample collection, timely reports, and expert-backed diagnostics.
Book Your Tests Today

PREVENTION OF DEMENTIA
Prevention Of Dementia


Certain types of dementia cannot be entirely prevented. Making healthy lifestyle choices can help prevent dementia that originates from a poor lifestyle. These lifestyle choices are:

1. NOURISH YOUR BRAIN
1. Nourish your brain
Eat a well-balanced diet packed with essential vitamins and minerals to support cognitive health.


2. STAY ACTIVE, STAY SHARP
2. Stay active, stay sharp
Engage in regular physical activity for overall health. Keep your brain engaged with puzzles, reading, and other stimulating activities for your brain health.


3. MANAGE YOUR HEALTH
3. Manage your health
Keep conditions like diabetes, hypertension, and thyroid issues in check with proper treatment.

Take control of your conditions with smart monitoring! Stay on top of your health with reliable healthcare devices for better management.
Shop Now

4. PRIORITIZE REST
4. Prioritize rest
Stick to a consistent sleep schedule to ensure deep, restorative sleep for a healthy brain.

Create a relaxing bedtime routine with our extensive range of sleep aid products designed to give you the good night’s sleep you deserve.
Check Them Out Now
SPECIALIST TO VISIT
Specialist To Visit


Close family members or loved ones often observe the symptoms of dementia. When a person starts forgetting important or routine things often and displays changes in behavior, speech, and other cognitive abilities, it is essential to evaluate him/her for probable dementia. The specialists who can diagnose and treat dementia are:
General physicianNeurologistNeuropsychologistPsychiatrist


Ageneral physiciancan evaluate overall health, provide initial assessments, and refer to specialists for further diagnosis and treatment.


Aneurologistspecializes in diagnosing and managing neurological conditions, including dementia, by identifying underlying brain-related causes.


Aneuropsychologistconducts cognitive testing to assess memory, thinking, and behavior, helping to monitor the progression of dementia.


Apsychiatristtreats any psychiatric symptoms associated with dementia and prescribes medication to manage mood and behavior.


Don’t dismiss forgetfulness as just a sign of aging. Seek professional advice for timely diagnosis and the right treatment.Talk To An Expert
TREATMENT OF DEMENTIA
Treatment Of Dementia


The treatment for dementia mainly consists of supportive care and treating the causative factors wherever possible. It consists of:
1. MEDICINES TO IMPROVE COGNITIVE FUNCTIONS.
1. Medicines to improve cognitive functions.
Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors:These drugs prevent the breakdown of acetylcholinesterase enzymes which helps in taking care of the symptoms but do not have any effect on the progression of the disease. Examples of drugs in this class areDonepezil,Galantamine, andRivastigmine.

Nerve-protecting medicine:This class of drugs nourishes the nerve cells, protects them from damage, and improves their survival. Examples includeCiticoline.

N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) agonists:These are drugs that decrease the activity of glutamate (a chemical that helps transmit signals between nerve cells), thereby controlling the symptoms. Example:Memantine.

Antioxidant drugs:These drugs help to improve the symptoms of dementia by fighting the free radicals that could be responsible for symptoms such as decline in memory. The class of drugs which are popular include Coenzyme Q10,Ginkgo biloba, etc

Nootropic drugs:Nootropic drugs likepiracetamwork by affecting certain brain receptors to improve memory and mental sharpness, potentially helping with cognitive issues.

Cyclooxygenase (COX) inhibitors:These are designed to relieve pain, decrease inflammation, and reduce fever. It can decrease the production of nitric oxide (NO), and protect neurons against glutamate toxicity, thereby controlling the symptoms of dementia. Example:Ibuprofen.

Statins:These are a type of drug that can help treat dementia caused by small blood vessel blockages in the brain by reducing these blockages and improving symptoms. An example includes:Atorvastatin.


2. MEDICINES TO CALMANXIETYAND IMPROVE SLEEP
2. Medicines to calmanxietyand improve sleep
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs):Such asfluoxetineorsertralinefordepressionand anxiety.

Benzodiazepines:Likelorazepamfor short-term relief of anxiety.

Antipsychotic medications:Such asquetiapinefor irritability or aggression.

3. OTHER MEDICINES FOR REVERSIBLE CAUSES OF DEMENTIA
3. Other medicines for reversible causes of dementia
Supplements:Sometimes dementia is caused by nutritional deficiencies. Correcting these with vitamin supplements can help reverse dementia.

Explore Vitamin Supplements
Antidiabetics & antihypertensives:Treating diabetes with oral hypoglycemic drugs or insulin and hypertension with antihypertensives is essential if dementia is found to be a complication of these comorbidities.

Antibiotics & anti-inflammatory drugs:Any infection or inflammatory condition in the body must be treated with appropriate antibiotics and anti-inflammatory drugs if dementia results from an infection or inflammation in the body.

Get door-step delivery of your medicines with a simple click.
Upload Your Prescription
HOME CARE FOR DEMENTIA
Home Care For Dementia


Some home remedies may help relieve dementia symptoms, but further research is needed to confirm their effectiveness. It is important to understand they should not replace standard medical treatment. They include:


1. Sage:A herb that may help improve memory and thinking.
How to use it?
Use it as a tea or add it to your meals for a memory boost.

2.Ginkgo biloba:A plant believed to help with brain circulation and clarity.
How to use it?
Take in capsule or tablet form to support cognitive function.|


3. Lemon balm:A calming herb that can help reduce stress and agitation.
How to use it?
Use it as a tea or apply it as an essential oil for relaxation.


4.Lavender:Known for its ability to reduce anxiety and improve sleep.
How to use it?
Diffuse the oil or use it in a pillow spray before bed for better sleep.

5. St. John's wort:A plant that may help improve mood and reduce depression.
How to use it?
Take it as a supplement or tea, but check with a doctor for the right dosage.


6. Curcumin:A compound inturmericthat may protect brain cells.
How to use it?
Add turmeric to your food or take it as a supplement for its potential brain benefits.

Buy Turmeric Products Online

COMPLICATIONS OF DEMENTIA
Complications Of Dementia


Dementia is a progressive condition that can worsen with time. The treatments currently available are known to slow the progression of the disease but cannot entirely stop it. Dementia can cause the following complications as it worsens gradually.


Safety issues:Individuals with dementia are at an increased risk of injuries even while performing activities like walking, cooking, cleaning, etc.
Personal hygiene:In the later stages, people with dementia struggle with basic human hygiene, such as brushing, bathing, grooming, and using the bathroom.
Nutritional challenges:With advanced dementia, a person may forget to eat and may lose interest in eating. This can lead to malnutrition.
Aspiration or choking:Trouble swallowing food can lead to aspiration or choking and causepneumonia.

ALTERNATIVES THERAPIES OF DEMENTIA
Alternatives Therapies Of Dementia


Alternative therapies may help manage dementia symptoms, but they should not replace conventional medical treatment. Some beneficial therapies include:
1. EXERCISE AND YOGA
1. Exercise and yoga
Performing light exercises can help enhance mood, manage anxiety in individuals with dementia, and maintain their physical activity status. These light exercises can include a home-based aerobic routine, dancing as a form of exercise, lifting light weights, and yoga such as Pranayama.


2. PHYSIOTHERAPY AND OCCUPATIONAL THERAPY
2. Physiotherapy and occupational therapy
Certain modifications suggested by physiotherapists or occupational therapists may need to be implemented in an individual with dementia home or work environment to make it safer and prevent injuries due to falls.


3. MASSAGE THERAPY AND AROMATHERAPY
3. Massage therapy and aromatherapy
Massage therapy and aromatherapy induce relaxation and may be helpful for people with dementia.


4. AYURVEDA
4. Ayurveda
Dementia is known as Smrutibuddhirhass in Ayurveda. Panchkarma and medicinal herbs likeShankhpushpi, Guduchi,Brahmi,Ashwagandha,Shatavari, etc., may be useful in managing the symptoms of dementia.
LIVING WITH DEMENTIA
Living with Dementia


Often, receiving a diagnosis of dementia can be a life-altering and challenging situation for patients and their caregivers. Coming to terms with the diagnosis can invoke feelings of anxiety, depression, anger, rage, guilt, etc. However, it is important to remember that a diagnosis of dementia does not necessarily mean the end of life. It is possible to live a happy life even after being diagnosed with dementia. Certain things that can help include:
1. ESTABLISH A ROUTINE
1. Establish a routine
A consistent daily routine can help reduce confusion and anxiety.
Break tasks down into smaller steps to make them more manageable.


2. PROMOTE MENTAL STIMULATION
2. Promote mental stimulation
Engage in cognitive activities like puzzles, reading, or social interactions to keep the brain active.


3. SEEK EMOTIONAL SUPPORT
3. Seek emotional support
Join support groups or seek professional counselling to cope with emotional challenges.
Stay connected with loved ones and participate in social activities to avoid isolation.


4. MONITOR YOUR CONDITION
4. Monitor your condition
Work with a doctor to ensure the correct medications are being administered,and  manage symptoms and comorbid conditions.
Always keep your doctor informed about any new symptoms.


TIPS FOR CAREGIVERS
Tips for caregivers
Encourage the person to maintain a diary or calendar to note down important things or days, which will help them remember.
Always keep the atmosphere at home pleasant, positive, and caring.
Ensure that the individual with dementia has access to important data, such as identity documents, home addresses, important telephone numbers, etc., at all times
People with dementia are often at an increased risk of falls due to concurrent motor issues. Hence, take care and ensure that their surroundings are well-lit, spacious, and free of obstacles.
Do not allow a person with dementia to drive or operate heavy machinery, always assist them.

Understand the difference between Alzheimer's disease and dementia. Listen to our expert break it down for you to help you manage your condition better.
Watch This Video


Did our information help you?In our relentless endeavour to keep improving our services, you are our eyes. Kindly take out sometime to guide us on how to serve your better.Share your feedbackSubscribe to stay informedSubscribe to our carefully crafted informative emailers by Medical Experts and be the first to get the latest health news, tips and important updates.SubmitDisclaimerTata 1mg's sole intention is to ensure that its consumers get information that is expert-reviewed, accurate and trustworthy. However, the information contained herein should NOT be used as a substitute for the advice of a qualified physician. The information provided here is for informational purposes only. This may not cover all possible side effects, drug interactions or warnings or alerts. Please consult your doctor and discuss all your queries related to any disease or medicine. We intend to support, not replace, the doctor-patient relationship.

--- REFERENCES ---

- World Health Organization. Dementia: number of people affected to triple in next 30 years. 2017 Dec 7. Available from:  (https://www.who.int/news/item/07-12-2017-dementia-number-of-people-affected-to-triple-in-next-30-years )
- Kumar A, Sidhu J, Goyal A, et al. Alzheimer Disease. [Updated 2020 Nov 18]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2021 Jan.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK499922/)
- Arvanitakis, Z., Shah, R. C., & Bennett, D. A. (2019). Diagnosis and Management of Dementia: Review. JAMA, 322(16), 1589–1599.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7462122/)
- Emmady PD, Tadi P. Dementia.Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2021 Jan.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK557444/)
- Dementia. World Health Organisation.  (https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/dementia)
- Dementia. National Health Portal of India.  (https://www.nhp.gov.in/disease/neurological/dementia)
- Singh SK, Srivastav S, Castellani RJ, Plascencia-Villa G, Perry G. Neuroprotective and Antioxidant Effect of Ginkgo biloba Extract Against AD and Other Neurological Disorders. Neurotherapeutics. 2019 Jul;16(3):666-674. Available from:  (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6694352/ )
- Tiwari, R. S., & Tripathi, J. S. (2013). A critical appraisal of dementia with special reference to Smritibuddhihrass. Ayu, 34(3), 235–242.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3902586/)
- Markota M, Rummans TA, Bostwick JM, Lapid MI. Benzodiazepine Use in Older Adults: Dangers, Management, and Alternative Therapies. Mayo Clin Proc. 2016;91(11):1632-1639. Available from:  (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27814838/ )
- Perry E, Howes MJ. Medicinal plants and dementia therapy: herbal hopes for brain aging? CNS Neurosci Ther. 2011 Dec;17(6):683-98. Available from:  (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6493900/ )
- Ball EL, Owen-Booth B, Gray A, Shenkin SD, Hewitt J, McCleery J. Aromatherapy for dementia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2020 Aug 19;8(8):CD003150. Available from:  (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7437395/ )
- Begde A, Jain M, Hogervorst E, Wilcockson T. Does physical exercise improve the capacity for independent living in people with dementia or mild cognitive impairment: an overview of systematic reviews and meta-analyses. Aging Ment Health. 2022 Dec;26(12):2317-2327.Available from:  (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9662184/ )
- Viggo Hansen N, Jørgensen T, Ørtenblad L. Massage and touch for dementia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2006 Oct 18;2006(4):CD004989. Available from:  (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6823223/ )
- Farooqui AA, Farooqui T, Madan A, Ong JH, Ong WY. Ayurvedic Medicine for the Treatment of Dementia: Mechanistic Aspects. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2018 May 15;2018:2481076. Avaible from:  (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5976976/ )
- Subash S, Essa MM, Al-Adawi S, Memon MA, Manivasagam T, Akbar M. Neuroprotective effects of berry fruits on neurodegenerative diseases. Neural Regen Res. 2014 Aug 15;9(16):1557-66.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4192974/ )
- Kumar CS, George S, Kallivayalil RA. Towards a Dementia-Friendly India. Indian J Psychol Med. 2019 Sep 5;41(5):476-481. Available from:  (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6753713/ )
- Alzheimer’s and Related Disorders Society of India. ARDSI – Alzheimer's and Related Disorders Society of India [Internet]. India: ARDSI; [cited 2025 Feb 9]. Available from:  (https://ardsi.org/)
