https://www.1mg.com/diseases/itching-373#

ITCHING
ItchingAlso known as Pruritus and Scratching
OVERVIEW
Overview
Itching is an irritating sensation that makes you scratch. It is a common and unpleasant sensation that can range from mild to severe. The most common causes of itching are contact with an allergen, dry skin, sunburn, fungal skin infection, or as a symptom of other underlying health conditions.

Some of the few signs of itching are skin irritation, a strong urge to scratch, skin breaks that open and bleed, and swollen skin.

Treatment varies according to the cause of itching. General steps to treat itching are regular use of moisturizers or emollients, application of cold, wet cloth, and cooling agents like menthol or calamine to the affected area. OTC creams with anti-itch ingredients and mild-strength steroids are also available.

If the symptoms persist, further treatment is based on the cause of the symptoms and the health conditions associated with it.
KEY FACTS
Key FactsUsually seen inAll age groups, common in the elderlyGender affectedBoth men and women. More common in women.Mimicking ConditionsContact dermatitisSeborrheic dermatitisDrug eruptionsScabiesPsoriasisEctodermal dysplasiaHyper IgE syndromeNetherton's syndromeWiskott-Aldrich syndromeNecessary health tests/imaging
1.Laboratory tests
Complete blood count (CBC)
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)
Total IgE test
Specific IgE test
Allergy panel
Fasting glucose
Liver (LFT)andKidney Function Test (KFT)
Blood urea nitrogen (BUN)
Thyroid function tests
Stool analysis
2.Imaging tests
Chest Computed Tomography (CT) Scan

3.Skin biopsyTreatment
1. General treatment
Moisturizers
Cooling agents, such as menthol or calamine.
OTC creams with anti-itch ingredients such as crotamiton.
2. Topical treatment
Corticosteroids:Hydrocortisone

Local anesthetics:Benzocaine,Lidocaine,Polidocanol, andPramoxine

Topical calcineurin inhibitors:TacrolimusandPimecrolimus

Tricyclic Antidepressants:Doxepin5% cream

Capsaicin
3. Systemic treatment
Antihistamines:Chlorphenamine,Cinnarizine,,Diphenhydramine,andHydroxyzine.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs):ParacetamolandIbuprofen

Antidepressants:FluoxetineandSertraline

Anticonvulsants:GabapentinandPregabalin
Immunosuppressants:Cyclosporine A andThalidomideSpecialists to consult
General Physician
Dermatologist
SYMPTOMS OF ITCHING
Symptoms of Itching

Itching can affect a small area, such as the scalp, arm, leg, or whole body of the individual. Itchy skin can occur without any noticeable changes on the skin however in some cases, associated symptoms may include:

Skin irritation
Strong urge to scratch
Dry skin
Pain at the site of itching
Skin discoloration
Small bumps on the skin called papules
Skin rash causing swelling or inflammation
Broken skin leading to bleeding
Yellow-to-white fluid leaking from broken skin


Tired of Itching? Explore our widest range of moisturizers and lotions to help ease itchy skin.
Shop for body lotions

TYPES OF ITCHING
Types Of Itching
1. PRURICEPTIVE ITCH

1. Pruriceptive itch
The most common type is generated in the skin either by inflammation or skin damage. Many types of age-related changes in the barrier function of the skin can also lead to pruriceptive itch.
2. NEUROGENIC AND SYSTEMIC ITCH
2. Neurogenic and Systemic itch
Neurogenic and systemic itch originate from conditions affecting other organs than the skin. Some of these conditions include chronic kidney failure, liver disease, blood disorders, and cancers. These itches are transmitted via the central nervous system.
3. PSYCHOGENIC ITCH
3. Psychogenic itch
This type of itching is associated with psychological abnormalities and is considered psychiatric in origin includingdepression,anxiety, mania, psychosis, and substance abuse have been associated with itch.
4. NEUROPATHIC ITCH
4. Neuropathic itch
It specifically refers to itching that arises from dysfunction or damage to the nervous system, such as nerve injuries, compression, or diseases like neuropathy.
CAUSES OF ITCHING
Causes of Itching

Itching can be a symptom of many health conditions. It occurs when certain nerve fibers called C-fibers are stimulated. These fibers transmit itch signals to the brain in response to various irritants, allergies, or skin conditions, leading to the sensation of itching.

The next section explores the different risk factors associated with these causes.
RISK FACTORS FOR ITCHING
Risk Factors For Itching

1. Age
For individuals above 65 years, the skin becomes thinner and loses moisture, which can lead to itching due to dryness.


2. Skin conditionsSunburnDry skinEczemaPsoriasisUrticariaDandruff

3. Fungal infectionsThrushRingwormAthlete’s foot

4. Autoimmune disordersDermatomyositisSystemic sclerosisSjögren syndrome


5. Nerve disordersMultiple sclerosisPinched nervesShingles (herpes zoster)Brain tumorsBrachioradial pruritus (Itching or burning around the outer forearm which is a nerve disorder)

6. Psychiatric conditionsAnxietyObsessive-compulsive disorderDepressionAnorexia nervosaDelusional disorders

7. Hormonal changesPregnancyMenopause

8. Allergic reactionsReactions from certain things like wool, chemicals, soaps, and cosmetics

9. Other conditionsChicken PoxLiver diseaseKidney diseaseAnemiaCertain cancers likeblood cancer,skin cancer, and liver cancer.Diabetes

Learn more about how Diabetes can cause several skin issues and ways to manage them.
Read along

10. Certain medicationsAspirinOpioidsBlood-pressure-reducing drugs like amlodipine, atenolol, and hydrochlorothiazide.Medications used for cancer treatment

11. Bug bitesBed bugsHead liceMites (scabies)

Safeguard yourself and your family from insect bites with our exclusive range of products.
Shop here

DIAGNOSIS OF ITCHING
Diagnosis Of Itching
1. HISTORY AND PHYSICAL EXAMINATION

1. History and physical examination
To diagnose itching, the doctor will physically examine the skin and gather more information about the symptoms and the medical health history.
2. LABORATORY TESTS
2. Laboratory tests
The doctor might suggest a few tests to reconfirm the diagnosis. Testing helps in determining the cause of the symptoms, whether it is due to a primary condition or it might be a symptom of another condition.
Test include are:
Complete blood count (CBC):A complete blood count can provide evidence of an internal condition causing the itch, such as anemia.
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR):A high ESR can be a sign of inflammation or infection that can lead to itchy skin.
Total IgEtest:The Total IgE test measures the total amount of immunoglobulin E (IgE) in the blood in response to an allergy.
Specific IgE test:Measures the level of IgE being made in the body in response to a single allergen. A separate test is done for each allergen.
Allergy panel:This constitutes more than 29 tests that help to identify certain allergens that can trigger a reaction and cause symptoms like itching.
Fasting glucose:High blood sugar levels over a prolonged period of time are one cause of itchy skin. Also, it can be used to diagnose underlying causes like diabetes.
Liver (LFT)andKidney Function Test {KFT):These are done to assess conditions related to the liver or kidney that can cause itching.
Blood urea nitrogen (BUN):The BUN test measures the amount of urea nitrogen in the blood. This test is usually advised when a patient is showing signs of kidney disease, such as fatigue, itching, muscle cramps, and dark-colored urine.
Thyroid function tests:These tests measure levels of thyroid hormones in the blood. The overproduction or underproduction of thyroid hormones can lead to skin problems, thereby causing itching.
Stool analysis:During this test, the stool is analyzed for ova (eggs) and parasites. This is a simple test for determining parasitic infection which can cause itching.

Booking your lab tests just got easier. Get all the tests done in the comfort and safety of your home.
Find all the tests here
3. IMAGING TESTS
3. Imaging tests
Chest Computed Tomography (CT) Scan:A CT scan is a diagnostic imaging exam that uses X-ray technology to produce images of the inside of the body. This test can show enlarged lymph nodes. This can help detect any conditions associated with itching.
4. SKIN BIOPSY
4. Skin biopsy
This procedure can help in diagnosing skin disorders such as psoriasis, eczema, actinic keratosis (precancers), and warts, that can predispose to itching. It involves taking a small sample of skin and examining it under a microscope.
PREVENTION OF ITCHING
Prevention Of Itching

Drink 8-10 glasses of water a day to keep the skin supple and hydrated.
Use lukewarm water for bathing. Do not exceed the shower time greater than 10 minutes.
Always use gentle and skin-friendly soaps and body washes.
Moisturize the skin daily or multiple times a day. Try using an unperfumed moisturizer or emollient.
Prefer loose breathable clothing. Avoid wearing tight clothes, especially those made from synthetic fabrics.
Apply sunscreen and wear UV-protective clothing and accessories while going out.

Using a sunscreen with SPF of at least 30 helps prevent sunburn, dryness, and allergic reactions, thereby, reducing the risk of itching.Watch the video to choose the right sunscreen.
Tap hereUse laundry liquids or powders that are not harsh for sensitive skin for washing clothes.
Use a humidifier to manage the moisture indoors to prevent dry skin.
Reduce stress, as stress can initiate itching and make it worse.


Explore our Mental wellness range to deal with stress.
Add to cart

SPECIALIST TO VISIT
Specialist To Visit

Doctors that can help you diagnose and treat itching include:General Physician
Dermatologists


A general physician can diagnose and treat underlying medical conditions that cause itching and provide guidance on symptom management and preventive measures.

A dermatologist can diagnose and treat a wide range of skin conditions causing itching, offering specialized expertise in skin health and prescribing appropriate treatments.

Do not take itching lightly. Seek medical help from our trusted team of doctors.
Book your appointment now

TREATMENT OF ITCHING
Treatment Of Itching

The treatment for itching focuses on managing the cause of itching along with symptomatic relief.
1. FIRST LINE OF TREATMENT
1. First line of treatment
Apply a cold, wet cloth or ice pack to the skin that itches preferably for 10 minutes till itching subsides.
Creams containing moisturizing ingredients such as ceramides, glycerin, aloe, hyaluronic acid, vitamin E, petrolatum, and humectants can be used.
Apply cooling agents, such as menthol or calamine. These can be placed in the refrigerator to achieve a better cooling effect.
OTC creams with anti-itch ingredients such as crotamiton can also provide relief.
Mild strength steroid creams are available over-the-counter. They should be used only for a few days for small, inflamed areas. eg. Topicalhydrocortisone.

Explore our wide range of moisturizers and lotions to help ease itchy skin.
Fill your cart now
In case itching does not subside after the first line of treatment, the following specific treatment is advised depending on the cause of itching:
2. TOPICAL TREATMENT
2. Topical treatment
Antifungal creams or dusting powders are recommended for treatment of itching associated with fungal infections. Some common examples of antifungal medicines are:
Clotrimazole
Econazole
Miconazole
Fluconazole
Ketoconazole

Shop from our extensive range of antifungal creams and powders to deal with itching and rashes.
Add to cart
Topical steroids:Higher-strength steroid creams are prescription only and are to be used only under medical supervision.
Local anesthetics:These are used for the symptomatic treatment of localized forms of neuropathic itching, and chronic kidney disease (CKD)-associated itching. Most common examples include:
Benzocaine
Lidocaine
Polidocanol
PramoxineTopical calcineurin Inhibitors:These work by reducing inflammation and suppressing the immune response in the skin, providing relief for conditions like eczema. Examples includes:
Tacrolimus
Pimecrolimus
Tricyclic antidepressants:These work by blocking certain nerve signals and provide relief for chronic and neuropathic itching.Doxepin5% cream is commonly used.
Capsaicin:It is used for localized areas of chronic itching and neuropathic itching. This cream should be applied regularly to achieve its full effect.
3. SYSTEMIC TREATMENT
3. Systemic treatment
Antihistamines:These are medicines often used to relieve symptoms of allergies. The most commonly used drugs include
Chlorphenamine
Cinnarizine
Diphenhydramine
Hydroxyzine.
Acrivastine
Cetirizine
FexofenadineNonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs):These medications are given to decrease inflammation and discomfort. The commonly used drugs include
Paracetamol
IbuprofenAntidepressants:Antidepressants also called selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) may help ease some types of long-term itch. A few examples are:
Fluoxetine
SertralineAnticonvulsants:These drugs aid in treating neuropathic itch and chronic kidney disease-associated itching. Examples include:
Gabapentin
PregabalinImmunosuppressants:These classes of drugs control or suppress the immune system and help in stopping the itch-scratch cycle that allows the skin to heal and reduce the risk of skin infection. Example of this class:
Cyclosporine A
Thalidomide

Get your medications online from India’s largest online pharmacy.
Order now

HOME-CARE FOR ITCHING
Home-care For Itching

General tips that help relieve itching and prevent damage caused by scratching are:
Keep your nails clean, short, and smooth.
Try tapping or patting the itchy area, rather than scratching it.
Hold a cold compress over the affected area to cool it down.
Wear cotton gloves at night to prevent damage from scratching in the sleep.
Avoid alcohol, caffeine, and spicy foods that can affect the blood flow to the skin and worsen itching.

Some home remedies that can help relieve the symptoms include:
1. Oatmeal bath:Oats work wonders for dry, itchy skin and can be used on a variety of skin irritations like eczema and rashes as they help restore the moisture levels of the skin.
How to use it?
Grind rolled oats into a thin powder, mix the powder in the bath water, soak the body in it for 15 to 20 minutes and rinse.
2.Aloe vera(Ghritkumari):Fresh aloe vera gel is useful in treating rashes or itching due to its anti-inflammatory, anti-microbial, anti-viral, and antioxidant properties.
How to use it?
Take a fresh aloe leaf, cut open the leaf, scrape out the gel, and gently directly on the affected skin.
Here is a list of amazing health benefits of aloe vera.
Click here to read

3.Coconutoil (Nariyal Tel):Coconut oil has the natural ability to penetrate the skin quickly. The oil is good for boosting hydration, improving skin elasticity, fighting itch, and reducing the chances of infection from skin conditions.

Shop for coconut oil

4. Peppermint oil:It can reduce itching due to its antimicrobial and antiseptic properties.
How to use it?
Peppermint oil can be used by mixing with a carrier oil like coconut oil and can be applied to the affected areas.

Read more about peppermint oil

5.Apple cider vinegar (ACV):ACV contains antiseptic properties that can help in soothing itchy skin, especially for people who suffer from psoriasis.
How to use it?
Dabbing diluted ACV on the affected area can help neutralize the itch while balancing the pH levels of the skin and hence speed up the healing process.Buy apple cider vinegar

6.Honey(shahad):It is loaded with humectants and anti-microbial and anti-inflammatory properties that can help with providing relief from dry skin and itching.
How to use it?
Apply by dipping a cotton ball in the itchy area and leaving it for 10 to 15 minutes. Rinse it with warm water.

Learn more about why honey is so good.
Click here

7.Neem:It is one of the most essential herbs used to treat a lot of skin ailments as it is rich in anti-inflammatory and anti-microbial properties that help in soothing itchy skin.
How to use it?
A paste of neem leaves with water can be made by grinding them. Apply the paste on irritated skin. Wash once dried.


Know more about Neem’s healing powers.
Tap here

COMPLICATIONS OF ITCHING
Complications Of Itching

Chronic pruritus or itching that lasts more than 6 weeks can affect the quality of life and cause the following complications:

Thickening and hardening of the skin
Redness of the skin
Continuous urge to scratch or pick at the skin
Deep cuts or tears in the skin
Scarring
Infections
Disturbed sleep
Anxiety and depression
ALTERNATIVE THERAPIES FOR ITCHING
Alternative Therapies For Itching

There are several different alternative therapies that can provide relief from itching. However, it is important to consult your doctor before trying anything new. Some of the commonly used therapies for itching include:
1. LIGHT THERAPY (PHOTOTHERAPY)
1. Light therapy (phototherapy)
This therapy involves exposing the skin to a specific type of light. This can be a good option for people who can't take oral medicines. An individual requires a few phototherapy sessions until the itching is under control.
2. HOMEOPATHY
2. Homeopathy
Studies have shown that homeopathy can be quite effective in managing skin rashes and itching.
3. CHINESE TRADITIONAL THERAPY
3. Chinese traditional therapy
Traditional Chinese medicine can be beneficial in managing itching. It uses oral herbal medicine, herbal fumigation, and external washing as some of the ways to address it.
4. ACUPUNCTURE
4. Acupuncture
In this therapy, very thin steel needles are inserted into the skin to relieve some health conditions and symptoms. This procedure can reduce the intensity of itching with the inhibition of brain activation.
5. BEHAVIORAL THERAPY
5. Behavioral Therapy
This therapy is also effective in the management of itching from atopic dermatitis. In behavioral therapy, participants learn to intentionally suppress the reflex to scratch through diversion and habit reversal.Did our information help you?In our relentless endeavour to keep improving our services, you are our eyes. Kindly take out sometime to guide us on how to serve your better.Share your feedbackSubscribe to stay informedSubscribe to our carefully crafted informative emailers by Medical Experts and be the first to get the latest health news, tips and important updates.SubmitDisclaimerTata 1mg's sole intention is to ensure that its consumers get information that is expert-reviewed, accurate and trustworthy. However, the information contained herein should NOT be used as a substitute for the advice of a qualified physician. The information provided here is for informational purposes only. This may not cover all possible side effects, drug interactions or warnings or alerts. Please consult your doctor and discuss all your queries related to any disease or medicine. We intend to support, not replace, the doctor-patient relationship.

--- REFERENCES ---

- Thurmond RL, Kazerouni K, Chaplan SR, Greenspan AJ. Antihistamines and itch. Handb Exp Pharmacol. 2015  (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25861785/)
- Garibyan L, Rheingold CG, Lerner EA. Understanding the pathophysiology of itch. Dermatol Ther. 2013 Mar-Apr;26  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3696473/#:~:text=Itch%20has%20been%20classified%20into,or%20more%20types%20of%20itch.)
- Ilnytska O, Kaur S, Chon S, Reynertson KA, Nebus J, Garay M, Mahmood K, Southall MD. Colloidal Oatmeal (Avena Sativa) Improves Skin Barrier Through Multi-Therapy Activity. J Drugs Dermatol. 2016 Jun1  (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27272074/)
- Tang Y, Cheng S, Wang J, Jin Y, Yang H, Lin Q, Xu S, Hui L, Yin Q, Yang Y, Wu X. Acupuncture for the Treatment of Itch: Peripheral and Central Mechanisms. Front Neurosci. 2022 Mar 30  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9005788/#:~:text=The%20reduction%20of%20the%20intensity,the%20itch%20reduction%20following%20acupuncture.)
- Chee A, Branca L, Jeker F, Vogt DR, Schwegler S, Navarini A, Itin P, Mueller SM. When life is an itch: What harms, helps, and heals from the patients' perspective? Differences and similarities among skin diseases. Dermatol Ther. 2020 Jul  (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32418352/)
- Nemeth V, Evans J. Eczema. [Updated 2022 Aug 8]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2023 Jan-.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK538209/)
- Yosipovitch G, Greaves MW, Schmelz M. Itch. Lancet. 2003 Feb 22;  (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12606187/)
- Tivoli YA, Rubenstein RM. Pruritus: an updated look at an old problem. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2009 Jul;2  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2924137/)
- Nowak DA, Yeung J. Diagnosis and treatment of pruritus. Can Fam Physician. 2017 Dec  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5729138/)
- Itchy skin. National Health Service. 10 July 2020.  (https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/itchy-skin/)
- Song J, Xian D, Yang L, Xiong X, Lai R, Zhong J. Pruritus: Progress toward Pathogenesis and Treatment. Biomed Res Int. 2018 Apr 11  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5925168/)
- Mahboub M, Aghazadeh Attari AM, Sheikhalipour Z, Mirza Aghazadeh Attari M, Davami B, Amidfar A, Lotfi M. A Comparative Study of the Impacts of Aloe vera Gel and Silver Sulfadiazine Cream 1% on Healing, Itching and Pain of Burn Wounds: A Randomized Clinical Trial. J Caring Sci. 2021 Oct 23  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9526796/#:~:text=The%20wound%20itching%20significantly%20reduced,group%20during%20the%20study%20period.)
- 10 REASONS YOUR SKIN ITCHES UNCONTROLLABLY AND HOW TO GET RELIEF. American Academy of Dermatology.  (https://www.aad.org/public/everyday-care/itchy-skin/itch-relief/relieve-uncontrollably-itchy-skin#  )
- Elsaie LT, El Mohsen AM, Ibrahim IM, Mohey-Eddin MH, Elsaie ML. Effectiveness of topical peppermint oil on symptomatic treatment of chronic pruritus. Clin Cosmet Investig Dermatol. 2016 Oct 11  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5066694/#:~:text=for%2014%20days.-,The%20severity%20of%20the%20itch%20was%20assessed%20and%20compared%20before,showed%20a%20significant%20statistical%20difference.)
- Luu LA, Flowers RH, Kellams AL, Zeichner S, Preston DC, Zlotoff BJ, Wisniewski JA. Apple cider vinegar soaks [0.5%] as a treatment for atopic dermatitis do not improve skin barrier integrity. Pediatr Dermatol. 2019 Sep  (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31328306/)
- McLoone P, Oluwadun A, Warnock M, Fyfe L. Honey: A Therapeutic Agent for Disorders of the Skin. Cent Asian J Glob Health. 2016 Aug4  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5661189/#:~:text=Topical%20application%204%20times%20daily,mild%20or%20no%20diaper%20dermatitis.)
- Godse, Kiran & Sangolli, Prabhakar & De(2021). Management of Pruritus in Indian Settings  (https://www.researchgate.net/publication/357648614_Management_of_Pruritus_in_Indian_Settings_An_Expert_Opinion)
