https://www.1mg.com/diseases/kawasaki-disease-1042#

KAWASAKI DISEASE
Kawasaki DiseaseAlso known as Kawasaki Syndrome, Mucocutaneous Lymph Node Syndrome-MCLS, and Infantile Polyarteritis Nodosa
OVERVIEW
Overview

Kawasaki disease is a rare condition that causes inflammation in the blood vessels, mainly affecting young children. The exact cause is unknown, but it’s thought to be linked to genetic factors and an overactive immune response, possibly by infections.

Fever, rash, red eyes, swollen hands and feet, and swollen lymph nodes characterize it. It is more common in children under 5 and tends to affect boys more than girls.

Treatment for Kawasaki disease often involves high-doseaspirinto reduce fever and inflammation and intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) to help prevent heart complications. Close monitoring and follow-up are crucial for managing the disease's effects on the heart and blood vessels.
KEY FACTS
Key FactsUsually seen inChildren below 5 years of ageGender affectedBoth boys and girls. More common in boys.Body part(s) involvedBlood vessels of the entire bodySkinEyesMucous membranesLymph nodes of the neckKidneysPrevalenceIndia:322 per 100,000 children(2017)Mimicking ConditionsPreseptal cellulitisPeritonsillar abscessRetropharyngeal abscessCervical lymphadenitisGroup A streptococcal infectionAdenovirus, Enterovirus, Parvovirus B19MeaslesMononucleosis (Epstein-Barr virus)Scarlet FeverRheumatic feverToxic shock syndromeMeningitisRocky mountain spotted feverStaphylococcal scalded skin syndrome (SSSS)Toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN)Lyme diseaseLeptospirosisNecessary health tests/imagingImaging tests:EchocardiogramandElectrocardiogram (ECG)Blood tests:Complete blood cell count (CBC),Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) test,C-reactive protein (CRP) test,Serum electrolytestest, andLiver function testUrinalysisCerebrospinal fluid evaluationTreatmentIntravenous immunoglobulin (IVIGAspirinAnticoagulants:HeparinCorticosteroids:MethylprednisoloneSpecialists to consultGeneral physiciansPediatriciansPediatric cardiologistsPediatric rheumatologistPediatric infectious disease specialistsSee All
SYMPTOMS OF KAWASAKI DISEASE
Symptoms Of Kawasaki Disease

Kawasaki disease (KD) generally affects children between the ages of 0-5 years. The signs and symptoms of Kawasaki disease usually occur in three phases. Initial symptoms of KD include:
PHASE ONE (ACUTE)
Phase one (acute)
High fever (102.2 F or 39 C)
Conjunctivitis(bloodshot eyes) without a heavy discharge
A rash on the trunk of the body and in the genital area
Red, dry, and cracked, lips
Strawberry tongue (tongue appears red, swollen, and covered with a bumpy texture)
Red, swollen skin on the palms of the hands and soles of the feet
Cervical lymphadenopathy (neck lymph nodes that are swollen)


PHASE TWO (SUBACUTE)
Phase two (subacute)
Peeling of the skin on the hands and feet
Joint painor discomfort
Diarrhea
Vomiting
Stomachache


PHASE THREE (CONVALESCENT)
Phase three (convalescent)
Symptoms usually fade in this phase, unless complications arise.
However, fatigue, irritability, and low energy can persist for up to eight weeks.Did you know?
A persistent fever lasting more than 5 days is a key symptom of Kawasaki disease and one of its earliest indicators.

Want to know what you should do if your child has a fever?Read This Now
CAUSES OF KAWASAKI DISEASE
Causes Of Kawasaki Disease

Kawasaki disease involves a likely infection that enters through breathing.
This triggers a response causing inflammation, involving immune cells and chemicals.
This can harm the heart and blood vessels, forming weak spots that might become aneurysms (bulges in blood vessel walls).
While the exact cause of Kawasaki disease remains unknown, certain risk factors have been associated with an increased likelihood of developing the condition which are discussed below.

RISK FACTORS OF KAWASAKI DISEASE
Risk Factors of Kawasaki Disease
The factors that can lead to Kawasaki disease include:

1. AGE
1. Age
Children under the age of 5 are most vulnerable to Kawasaki disease.


2. GENDER
2. Gender
Boys are more commonly affected by Kawasaki disease than girls.


3. ETHNICITY
3. Ethnicity
Kawasaki disease is more commonly reported in individuals of Asian descent, particularly Japanese and Korean ethnicity.
4. FAMILY HISTORY
4. Family history
Children whose parents have had Kawasaki disease are two times more likely to develop the disorder than those without.


5. FEVER
5. Fever
A fever lasting more than 8 days is a key risk factor for Kawasaki disease, as it may trigger an overactive immune response causing inflammation.


6. SEASONAL VARIATION
6. Seasonal variation
Kawasaki disease cases often exhibit seasonal patterns, with a higher incidence reported in late winter and early spring.

Note:Protecting children with good hygiene and limiting exposure to infections can help reduce risk. The first step in preventing any infection can be regular handwashing. Check out our widest range of sanitizers and handwashes to protect your child and yourself from infections.
Stock Up Now
DIAGNOSIS OF KAWASAKI DISEASE
Diagnosis Of Kawasaki Disease

Kawasaki disease is diagnosed when a patient presents with a persistent fever lasting more than 5 days, along with at least four of the following five clinical signs:

CONJUNCTIVAL INVOLVEMENT
Conjunctival Involvement
Redness affecting both eyes (bilateral)
No associated pain (painless)
No discharge (nonexudative)


LYMPH NODE ENLARGEMENT
Lymph Node Enlargement
Swollen cervical lymph nodes, typically larger than 1.5 cm
Usually affects only one side (unilateral)


SKIN RASH
Skin Rash
Frequently appears as a red, raised rash (maculopapular)


CHANGES IN EXTREMITIES
Changes in Extremities
Acute Phase: Redness and swelling of the hands and/or feet
Subacute Phase: Peeling of the skin around the nails (periungual desquamation)


MUCOSAL ALTERATIONS
Mucosal Alterations
Red, dry, and cracked lips
"Strawberry tongue," is characterized by a red tongue with enlarged taste buds
Widespread redness in the mouth or throat (diffuse erythema of the oral mucosa or oropharynx)

Other diagnostic approaches include:
1. IMAGING TESTS
1. Imaging tests
Echocardiogram:Kawasaki Disease can result in severe heart problems. This test uses ultrasound images to determine how well the heart is performing and can aid in diagnosing cardiac issues.

Electrocardiogram (ECG):An ECG is a gadget that records electrical activity in the heart. It is performed in Kawasaki disease to monitor for potential heart involvement and detect any abnormal heart rhythms or changes in heart function.

2. BLOOD TESTS
2. Blood tests
Complete blood cell count (CBC):Kawasaki's disease is identified by low red blood cell count, inflammation, and elevated levels of white blood cells.


Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR):ESR can assist evaluate whether or not inflammation is present. ESR levels in the blood are high in the case of Kawasaki disease.


C-reactive protein (CRP):In response to inflammation, your liver creates C-reactive protein, which is then released into the bloodstream. High CRP levels in the blood can be the reason for Kawasaki disease.


Serum electrolytes:This test detects abnormalities in blood components such as low sodium, low serum protein, and albumin which can be seen in Kawasaki disease.


Liver function test (LFT):Evaluating liver enzymes in Kawasaki disease helps assess the potential involvement of the liver due to inflammation and aids in monitoring the disease's impact on the body's organs.

If you're unsure where to go for lab tests, you can now easily book them online from your home with Tata 1mg.
Get Tested Now


4. URINALYSIS
4. Urinalysis
It is conducted in Kawasaki disease to assess kidney function and detect any abnormalities or signs of inflammation.


5. CEREBROSPINAL FLUID EVALUATION
5. Cerebrospinal fluid evaluation
Typically, increased lymphocytes (pleocytosis) with normal protein and glucose levels are observed in the cerebrospinal fluid in the case of Kawasaki disease.
PREVENTION OF KAWASAKI DISEASE
Prevention of Kawasaki Disease

Currently, there's no known way to prevent Kawasaki disease. However, there are certain things you can do that will ensure a healthy lifestyle and can help manage or prevent the disease. These include:

1. MAINTAIN GOOD HYGIENE
1. Maintain Good Hygiene
Encourage regular handwashing, especially before meals and after using the restroom.
This helps reduce the risk of infections that may trigger Kawasaki disease or worsen its symptoms.

2. STAY UP-TO-DATE WITH VACCINATIONS
2. Stay Up-To-Date With Vaccinations
Ensuring that your child is up-to-date with their recommended vaccinations can help prevent certain infections that have been associated with Kawasaki disease.
However, it's important to note that the exact relationship between vaccines and Kawasaki disease is still under study.Did you know?
Immunization saves between 2 and 3 million lives each year. According to WHO, every year, immunization prevents the loss of millions of lives by managing and eradicating specific life-threatening illnesses.Know More
SPECIALIST TO VISIT
Specialist To Visit

Specialists that can help to treat Kawasaki disease include:

General physician
Pediatrician
Pediatric cardiologist
Pediatric rheumatologist
Pediatric infectious diseases specialist

Ageneral physiciancan assist by recognizing early symptoms of Kawasaki disease, and referring the patient to a specialist for diagnosis and treatment.

Apediatricianis a child specialist who recognizes and diagnoses Kawasaki disease early, initiating appropriate treatment.

Apediatric cardiologisttreats the potential heart complications that can arise from Kawasaki disease.

Apediatric infectious disease specialistis responsible for diagnosing and treating a variety of infections. They ensure appropriate management to prevent potential complications and long-term effects of Kawasaki disease.

Apediatric rheumatologistcan assist in managing the inflammatory response seen in Kawasaki disease, providing specialized care to alleviate symptoms and prevent complications.

If your child shows symptoms of Kawasaki disease, such as cracked and red lips, swelling, and redness in certain areas, and a persistent high fever that does not improve with common medications, it is important to seek medical attention from a specialist.
Book Your Appointment
TREATMENT OF KAWASAKI DISEASE
Treatment Of Kawasaki Disease

The treatment of Kawasaki disease typically involves a combination of medications aimed at reducing inflammation and preventing complications. The primary treatment options include:

Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG):IVIG is a concentrated dose of antibodies obtained from donated blood plasma. It is given through a vein (intravenously) and works to decrease inflammation in the blood vessels.

Aspirin:High-dose aspirin is usually given during the acute phase of Kawasaki disease to reduce inflammation and decrease the risk of blood clot formation. Once the fever subsides, the dosage of aspirin is typically reduced to a low dose.

Anticoagulants:These are blood thinners that may be prescribed if there is a high risk of blood clot formation.Heparinis the most commonly used drug.

Note:CiclosporineA andmethotrexateare potential treatments for Kawasaki disease, but only cyclosporine A is occasionally used, while methotrexate lacks clear AHA recommendations due to limited understanding.

No more hustle and last-minute cancellations of your medications. Buy medicines from the comfort of your home, with quick and guaranteed delivery.
Order Now
HOME CARE FOR KAWASAKI DISEASE
Home Care for Kawasaki Disease

While Kawasaki disease requires medical treatment and supervision by healthcare professionals, there are some measures you can take at home to support your child's comfort and recovery. Here are some home care tips for Kawasaki disease:
1. PROVIDE COMFORT MEASURES
1. Provide comfort measures
Help your child feel more comfortable by providing a cool, quiet, and restful environment.
Dress them in loose, comfortable clothing and use lightweight bedding.
Keep the room well-ventilated and at a comfortable temperature.


2. KEEP THEM HYDRATED
2. Keep them hydrated
Encourage your child to drink plenty of fluids to stay hydrated. Offer water, diluted fruit juices, or electrolyte solutions.
If your child has a decreased appetite, offer small, frequent meals and snacks.


3. GIVE REST AND ACTIVITY IMPORTANCE
3. Give rest and activity importance
Rest is essential for recovery, so ensure your child gets adequate sleep and avoids strenuous activities.
However, gentle physical activity, such as short walks or light play, can be beneficial as tolerated and approved by the doctor.


4. FOCUS ON SKINCARE
4. Focus on skincare
If your child's skin starts peeling on the hands and feet during recovery, you can use moisturizers to help with dryness.
This will soothe the discomfort and improve skin healing.

Buy moisturizer online to keep your child skin happy and healthy.
Click Here
COMPLICATIONS OF KAWASAKI DISEASE
Complications Of Kawasaki Disease

Kawasaki disease, if left untreated or inadequately managed, can lead to various complications, particularly affecting the coronary arteries and the heart. Some of the potential complications include:
1. HEART COMPLICATIONS
1. Heart complications

Coronary artery abnormalities:This includes the formation of aneurysms, which are weakened areas in the walls of the coronary arteries.
Myocarditis:Kawasaki disease can cause inflammation of the heart muscle (myocarditis), leading to reduced heart function.
Heart valve problems:In some cases, Kawasaki disease can affect the heart valves, leading to valvular regurgitation (leaking valves) or stenosis (narrowing of the valves).
Pericarditis:Kawasaki disease can cause inflammation of the pericardium, which is the thin sac that surrounds the heart. This condition is known as pericarditis.
Blood vessel inflammation:In addition to the coronary arteries, Kawasaki disease can affect blood vessels in other parts of the body, leading to inflammation and potential complications in various organs, including the kidneys, liver, and lungs.

2. NEUROLOGICAL COMPLICATIONS
2. Neurological complications
These include irritability,headache, seizures, and changes in consciousness. Other rare complications include facial paralysis and stroke.

3. RENAL COMPLICATIONS
3. Renal complications
It can involve inflammation of the kidneys, leading to abnormal kidney function and sometimes causing protein or blood in the urine.
4. HEMATOLOGICAL COMPLICATIONS

4. Hematological complications
These include decreased platelet levels (thrombocytopenia) or elevated white blood cell counts.
Did you know?
COVID-19 can lead to a condition in children that mimics Kawasaki Disease, known as Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children (MIS-C).Learn More About Covid-19
ALTERNATIVE THERAPIES FOR KAWASAKI DISEASE
Alternative Therapies For Kawasaki Disease

Certain complementary therapies have shown good results along with conservative treatment in managing the symptoms of Kawasaki disease. These include:

I. CORTICOSTEROID THERAPY
I. Corticosteroid therapy
These can be used for persistent fever or inflammation despite IVIG treatment.Methylprednisoloneis used in case of severe inflammation.

II. CHINESE HERBAL MEDICINE
II. Chinese herbal medicine
It is a plant-based medicine that has been studied for the treatment of Kawasaki disease.
It can be used as part of conventional therapy.
Though it is safe, more study is required to identify its exact efficacy.
LIVING WITH KAWASAKI DISEASE
Living With Kawasaki Disease

Though Kawasaki disease is an acute infection, kids who suffer from it may require lifelong monitoring. The American Heart Association (AHA) recommendations for the monitoring of Kawasaki disease include:

BASELINE AND FOLLOW-UP ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY
Baseline and follow-up echocardiography
Initial echocardiography is recommended during the acute phase.
Repeat echocardiograms are advised at week 2 and weeks 6–8 after onset.
More frequent imaging is needed for patients with high-risk factors or slow recovery.


IN LOW-RISK CHILDREN
In low-risk children
Follow-up for at least 10–20 years, even without coronary abnormalities.

IN MODERATE-RISK CHILDREN
In moderate-risk children
If the aneurysm regresses by weeks 6–8, treat it as low-risk.
Cardiac evaluations every 3–5 years are advised.


IN HIGH-RISK CHILDREN
In high-risk children
High chance of coronary artery stenosis (narrowing or blockage of the coronary artery, which is the main artery that supplies blood to the heart) progression.
Comprehensive cardiac exams twice a year; yearly stress tests and perfusion studies are suggested.
Physical activity should be limited based on the risk of bleeding.
Invasive tests like angiography can be performed if needed.
Did our information help you?In our relentless endeavour to keep improving our services, you are our eyes. Kindly take out sometime to guide us on how to serve your better.Share your feedbackSubscribe to stay informedSubscribe to our carefully crafted informative emailers by Medical Experts and be the first to get the latest health news, tips and important updates.SubmitDisclaimerTata 1mg's sole intention is to ensure that its consumers get information that is expert-reviewed, accurate and trustworthy. However, the information contained herein should NOT be used as a substitute for the advice of a qualified physician. The information provided here is for informational purposes only. This may not cover all possible side effects, drug interactions or warnings or alerts. Please consult your doctor and discuss all your queries related to any disease or medicine. We intend to support, not replace, the doctor-patient relationship.

--- REFERENCES ---

- Disease Overview. Kawasaki Disease. Rare Disease Organization. Apr 2009.  (https://rarediseases.org/rare-diseases/kawasaki-disease/#synonyms )
- Angeline M. Owens; Michael C. Plewa.Kawasaki Disease. [Update: February 12, 2023]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2023 Jan-.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK537163/)
- Rowley AH. Kawasaki disease: novel insights into etiology and genetic susceptibility. Annu Rev Med. 2011;62:69-77.  (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3021097/ )
- Satoru Nagata. Causes of Kawasaki Disease—From Past to Present. National Library of Medicine. Front pediatrics. Published online 2019 Feb 5.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6371652/)
- Anthony H et al. Kawasaki disease. CLINICAL REVIEW. BMJ 2009;338:b1514.  (https://www.bmj.com/bmj/section-pdf/186211?path=/bmj/338/7703/Clinical_Review.full.pdf)
- Robin G et al. Kawasaki Disease: A Review. J Pediatr Health Care. (2011) 25, 379-387.  (https://www.jpedhc.org/action/showPdf?pii=S0891-5245%2811%2900232-X)
- World Immunization Week. World Health Organization.  (https://www.who.int/campaigns/world-immunization-week )
- Wardle AJ, Connolly GM, Seager MJ, Tulloh RM. Corticosteroids for the treatment of Kawasaki disease in children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017 Jan27;1(1):CD011188.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6464937/)
- E.J. Tizard. Complications of Kawasaki disease. Current Pediatrics (2005) 15, 62–68.  (http://kawasakidiseaseindia.org/html/images/KD%20complications.pdf)
- Complications of Kawasaki disease E.J. Tizard. Current Pediatrics (2005). Elsevier.  (http://kawasakidiseaseindia.org/html/images/KD%20complications.pdf)
- World Health Organization. Vaccines and immunization [Internet]. Geneva: World Health Organization; [cited 2024 Nov 14]. Available from:  (https://www.who.int/health-topics/vaccines-and-immunization#tab=tab_1 )
- Jinling Hu and Weidong Ren. Analysis of the Risk Factors in Prognosis of Kawasaki Disease With Coronary Artery Lesions. Frontiers in Pediatrics. Published online 7th Dec. 2021.  (https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fped.2021.798148/full)
- Who gets Kawasaki disease? Kawasaki disease. Vasculitis Foundation.  (https://www.vasculitisfoundation.org/education/forms/kawasaki-disease/#1545065802493-ced4ad53-0209)
- Cedric Manlhiot, Leonardo R Brandão, et al. Long-term anticoagulation in Kawasaki disease: Initial use of low molecular weight heparin is a viable option for patients with severe coronary artery abnormalities. Published online 30th April 2010.  (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20431996/)
- Dong Soo Kim. Diagnosis & Treatment. Kawasaki Disease. Yonsei Medical Journal.  ()
- Published online 31st Dec 2006.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2687814/)
- Symptoms & Treatment. Kawasaki Diseases. The National Health Service. Updated online 26 October 2021.  (https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/kawasaki-disease/treatment/)
- Ummusen Kaya Akca, Selman Kesici, et al. Kawasaki-like disease in children with COVID-19. National Library of Medicine. Published online 16 Sep 2020.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7492688/)
- Libing Zhu a, Lixing Lao b, et al. A child with Kawasaki disease successfully treated with Chinese herbal medicine: A case report with 12-month follow up. European Journal of Integrative Medicine. Published online June 2019.  (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1876382018310370)
- Ramphul K, Mejias SG. Kawasaki disease: a comprehensive review. Arch Med Sci Atheroscler Dis. 2018 Mar 21;3:e41-e45.  (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6374576/)
- Indian Academy of Pediatrics (IAP). COVID-19 and Kawasaki Disease: Are They Related? [Internet]. [cited 2024 Nov 14]. Available from:  (https://iapindia.org/pdf/nRICH-Article-51.pdf )
- Green J, Wardle AJ, Tulloh RM. Corticosteroids for the treatment of Kawasaki disease in children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2022 May 27;5(5):CD011188.  (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9139689/ )
- Jiao F, Jindal AK, Pandiarajan V, Khubchandani R, Kamath N, Sabui T, Mondal R, Pal P, Singh S. The emergence of Kawasaki disease in India and China. Glob Cardiol Sci Pract. 2017 Oct 31;2017(3):e201721.  (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5856971/# )
- Choi J, Chang S, Kim E, Min SY. Integrative treatment of herbal medicine with Western medicine on coronary artery lesions in children with Kawasaki disease. Medicine (Baltimore). 2022 Feb 18;101(7):e28802.  (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9281920/ )
