https://www.1mg.com/diseases/latex-allergy-1025#

LATEX ALLERGY
Latex AllergyAlso known as Allergy to natural rubber latex and NRLA allergy
OVERVIEW
Overview
Latex is a soft white substance found beneath the bark of a mature rubber tree. It is used to produce medical and consumer products, such as gloves, tubing, catheters, condoms, balloons, and shoe soles.


Individuals with latex allergy experience characteristic symptoms when exposed to latex, which include hives, itching, blisters on the back of the hand, runny nose, scratchy throat, sneezing, andconjunctivitis. Latex can get absorbed from the skin or lungs through contaminated air.


In most severe cases, it can lead toanaphylaxis, which involves severe breathing difficulty, fall in blood pressure, and shock. Anaphylaxis can be life-threatening and requires immediate medical treatment.


People working in the medical field, in housekeeping, or at restaurants are more likely to develop it due to repeated exposure to latex-containing material, especially gloves.


The mainstay of management is avoiding latex. Other treatment options include using antihistamines and topical steroids for symptomatic relief.
KEY FACTS
Key FactsUsually seen inAll age groupsGender affectedBoth men and womenMimicking ConditionsContact dermatitisConjunctivitis (Pink Eye)AnaphylaxisAsthmaSepsisCardiogenic shockNecessary health tests/imagingSerum IgESkin prick testSkin patch testRadioallergosorbent testFlow cytometryGenomic profilingTreatmentAvoidance of Latex productsAntihistamines:Diphenhydramine&CetirizineTopical steroids:HydrocortisoneAnti IgE:Omalizumab
CAUSES OF LATEX ALLERGY
Causes Of Latex Allergy


Latex is derived from the milky secretion of rubber trees, Hevea brasiliensis. These trees are predominantly found in Africa and Southeast Asia. Latex is used in various medical devices and consumer products.
MEDICAL DEVICES CONTAINING LATEX
Medical devices containing latex
Disposable gloves (the most common source of allergy)
Dental dams
Airway and intravenous tubing
Syringes
Stethoscopes
Catheters
Dressings
Bandages
Tourniquets (devices that are used to stop bleeding)
Electrode pads (small adhesive pads that are placed on the skin to relieve pain)
CONSUMER PRODUCTS CONTAINING LATEX
Consumer products containing Latex
The following latex-containing products can also be a source of its allergy:
Condoms
Handbags
Balloons
Athletic shoes
Tires
Tools
Underwear leg
Waistbands
Rubber toys
Baby bottles
Nipples
Pacifiers
WHAT CAUSES LATEX ALLERGY?
What causes latex allergy?
Allergies are caused when the body’s immunity responds abnormally to an external trigger known as an ‘allergen,’ which does not usually incite an immune response in most other humans.
There are hundreds of allergens found in natural rubber latex. The chemicals added to latex during its processing can also cause latex allergy.
HOW IS THE PERSON EXPOSED TO LATEX?
How is the person exposed to latex?
An individual can be exposed to latex through:
Direct exposure through the skin, mucus membranes, or intravenously
Contamination of food through gloves used by food handlers during preparation or serving
Inhaling latex powder through the lungs
WHAT HAPPENS UPON EXPOSURE TO LATEX IN HYPERSENSITIVE INDIVIDUALS?
What happens upon exposure to latex in hypersensitive individuals?
Once latex enters the bloodstream, it releases IgE antibodies (proteins that protect you when an unwanted substance enters your body). These antibodies bind to the allergic proteins found in latex. The binding releases several chemicals that elicit an immune response characterized by symptoms described in the next section.
SYMPTOMS OF LATEX ALLERGY
Symptoms Of Latex Allergy

The symptoms of latex allergy starts within a few minutes to four days after exposure to latex. The classical symptoms include:
Hives
Itching
Blisters on the back of the hand
Runny nose
Scratchy throat
Sneezing
Conjunctivitis

It can also cause asthma symptoms such as:
Coughing
Wheezing
Chest tightness
Difficulty in breathing

Here is all you need to know about respiratory allergy and asthma.
Tap to Read

In most severe cases, it can lead to anaphylaxis which involves:
Severe breathing difficulty
Fall in blood pressure
Shock

Understand the difference between allergies and anaphylaxis.
Tap Now


TYPES OF LATEX ALLERGY
Types Of Latex Allergy

Latex allergy is of two types:
1. DELAYED (TYPE IV) HYPERSENSITIVE REACTION
1. Delayed (type IV) hypersensitive reaction
The type IV hypersensitivity to latex results in an allergic contact dermatitis when exposed to latex.
Symptoms of delayed reaction usually developed 24 to 48 hours after the exposure.
The most common sources of type IV latex allergy are gloves for adults and shoe soles for children.
2. IMMEDIATE (TYPE 1) HYPERSENSITIVITY- IGE MEDIATED
2. Immediate (type 1) hypersensitivity- IgE mediated
It is the most serious allergic reaction as it can prove to be fatal in the absence of treatment.
It is caused due to the release of antibodies called immunoglobulin E (IgE) that are specific for latex proteins.
The increase in IgE triggers the release of histamine and other mediators that cause symptoms related to latex allergy. Symptoms generally begin within minutes of exposure.
RISK FACTORS FOR LATEX ALLERGY
Risk Factors For Latex Allergy

The risk factors of latex allergy include:
1. DIRECT EXPOSURE TO LATEX PRODUCTS
1. Direct exposure to latex products
People who are directly exposed to latex products (such as gloves) are more prone to develop latex allergy. Such people include:
Healthcare workers (such as doctors, nurses, and dentists)
Housekeepers
Hairdressers
Restaurant workers
Workers who work in the manufacturing of latex products
2.FOOD ALLERGIES
2.Food allergies
People with specific food allergies are at higher risk of developing latex reactions. Studies suggest that half of the population having latex allergy has cross-reactive food allergy also. Food that might increase the chances of latex allergy include:
Avocado
Banana
Chestnut
Kiwi
Passionfruit
Plum
Strawberry
Carrot
Celery
Melons
Papaya
Tomato

Confused about the food allergies in your children? Here is our expert to help you.
Watch Now

3. CERTAIN MEDICAL CONDITIONS
3. Certain medical conditions
Some medical conditions, particularly from an early age, need multiple surgeries. These conditions increase the risk of latex allergy because of frequent and repeated use of gloves, latex catheters, and tubing. Some of these conditions include:
Spina bifida (a condition that affects the spine and is usually present from birth)
Urogenital abnormalities
Presence of abnormal anal opening from birth
Abnormal connection between food and windpipe
Cerebral palsy
Quadriplegia (a symptom of paralysis that affects all a person's limbs and body from the neck down)
Preterm infants


4. PERSONAL AND FAMILY HISTORY OF OTHER ALLERGIC CONDITIONS
4. Personal and family history of other allergic conditions
Individuals with a family history of allergies, such asasthmaor hay fever, are more likely to develop latex allergy. Any other allergy also increases the risk of latex allergy.Interesting Fact
x-tinymce/htmlThe cases of latex allergy rose significantly in the late 1980s and 1990s. This was due to an increase in the use of latex gloves that were needed to care for patients with infectious diseases such as hepatitis C and HIV.
DIAGNOSIS OF LATEX ALLERGY
Diagnosis Of Latex Allergy

Latex allergy is diagnosed using a combination of medical history, physical examination, and several laboratory and clinical tests, as not one test is enough to confirm the allergy. The medical history involves understanding any past disease along with the list of foods that have caused an allergy.
All the procedures are performed with latex-free instruments, devices, and protective clothing.
1.IGE SERUM TESTING
1.IgE serum testing
Immunoglobulin E (IgE) are antibodies the immune system produces when exposed to an allergen.
The test is used as a preliminary test to detect general allergy, as it is not specific to latex allergy.
2. SKIN PRICK TEST (SPT)
2. Skin prick test (SPT)
This test involves pricking the skin and applying a latex extract. It is followed by a close examination of the skin for any signs of allergy, such as redness, itching, or any visual mark.
Due to its specificity, It is considered a gold standard for diagnosing IgE-mediated latex allergy.
3. SKIN PATCH TEST
3. Skin patch test
In this, the latex extract is placed on a patch, which is then applied to the skin. The skin's reaction is examined over 2 to 3 days.
4. RADIOALLERGOSORBENT TEST (RAST)
4. Radioallergosorbent test (RAST)
RAST is a blood test that detects specific IgE antibodies formed against a particular allergy.
5. FLOW CYTOMETRY
5. Flow cytometry
Flow cytometry is a laser-based technique that detects and analyzes cells' chemical and physical characteristics. Latex allergy leads to the activation of specific white blood cells, which flow cytometry detects.
6. GENOMIC PROFILING
6. Genomic profiling
This involves understanding genetic information, which serves as an excellent tool for evaluating risk and understanding the type of allergy. This, in turn, helps guide the treatment plan.
Genetic screening, a pivotal component of modern preventive medicine, systematically utilizes blood or skin samples to search for specific genotypes within defined populations. Here is a complete guide on genetic screening.
Know Now

CELEBS AFFECTED
Celebs affectedRuby Rose
Ruby Rose, an American actress and model, has a latex allergy, which she discovered while shooting the “Batwoman” series. She said that she developed hives on her face while using a latex mask during her role.
PREVENTION OF LATEX ALLERGY
Prevention Of Latex Allergy

Latex allergy can be prevented by limiting exposure to latex. The measures that help prevent latex allergy include:
A. PRIMARY PREVENTION
A. Primary prevention
It refers to preventing allergy before symptoms appear. This type of prevention is mainly helpful to susceptible workers who are frequently exposed to latex products.
1. At an individual level
Replacement of gloves:Gloves are used in several household chores that do not involve contact with infectious material, such as gardening, mixing paint, taking care of pets, and food preparation.
Using powder-free low protein (PFLP) or synthetic gloves instead of natural rubber gloves (NRL) in such work proves beneficial in preventing latex allergy.

Order latex-free gloves from the comfort of your home.
Shop Now

Avoid oil-based creams/lotions:Using oil-based creams and lotions can cause latex gloves to break down, increasing the chances of an allergic reaction. Keeping the skin dry while wearing latex gloves can prevent this.
Minimize the use of latex:Latex is present in various products used in day to day lives such as condoms, mats, masks, waistbands, and stockings.  Latex allergy can be prevented through using latex-free products instead of these in day-to-day life.


Explore an extensive range of latex-free products.
Buy Now

Maintain hand hygiene:Hand washing hands with soap and water after using gloves is also helpful in preventing allergies.


Shop from our wide range of hand washes and sanitizers.
Add to Cart
2. At Workplace
Formation of latex allergy task force:Latex allergy can be prevented by forming a task force in workplaces that use latex products, such as hospitals, clinics, and rubber industries. These task forces should focus on educating about latex allergy, including symptoms and preventive measures.
Implementing a latex-safe environment:It is used in all healthcare facilities for high-risk individuals. It includes scheduling the surgery of such persons first on the day of surgery and keeping the room unused for 3–6 hours.
This approach reduces the chances of developing latex allergy as latex can also be absorbed from contaminated surfaces and air.
B. SECONDARY PREVENTION
B. Secondary prevention
This involves additional measures along with a latex-safe environment to prevent symptoms in sensitized individuals.
One approach is to administer medications such as antihistamines before carrying out risky procedures.
SPECIALIST TO VISIT
Specialist To Visit

If you experience recurrent symptoms such as sneezing, skin rash, or chest tightness after exposure to latex, you may suffer from allergies and must seek medical care.
You should contact the emergency department of your nearest hospital if you suffer from an anaphylactic attack.
Based on your allergy symptoms, you can consult with:
General Physician
Dermatologist
Allergist
Immunologist
A general physician will examine your symptoms and initiate treatment.
A dermatologist helps manage skin symptoms such as hives, wheals, redness, and itching associated with latex allergy.
An allergist is a medical practitioner specializing in diagnosing and treating allergies.
Latex allergy involves the immune system. Immunologists specializing in immune system disorders can help diagnose and manage various allergic conditions including latex allergy.


Consult India’s best doctors online.
Book an Appointment

TREATMENT OF LATEX ALLERGY
Treatment Of Latex Allergy

The best way to manage latex allergy is to avoid it, as continued exposure can worsen the condition.
Treatment varies depending upon the reaction – a mild sensitivity or a life-threatening allergic reaction.
The first step in irritant dermatitis is to remove latex and clean the affected area.
Immediate monitoring and treatment for life-threatening conditions is needed for severe allergic reactions.

1. MEDICATIONS
1. Medications
These may be taken after exposure to latex to control your reaction and help relieve discomfort. The common medications used to treat symptoms associated with latex allergy include:
Antihistamines:These medications inhibit the release of histamine, a key mediator involved in allergic reactions. They are used to control most of the symptoms, such as hives, itching, runny nose, and sneezing, that are predominantly associated with latex allergy. Examples includediphenhydramineandcetirizine.
Topical steroids:Topical steroids are used to reduce inflammation.Hydrocortisoneis a commonly used medication.
Injectable:Adrenalineis the first-line treatment for severe reactions.
Anti-IgE therapy:Type 1 latex allergy is associated with an increase in the level of IgE, which triggers a cascade of events that cause symptoms.Omalizumabhas been found to significantly reduce the symptoms by decreasing the level of IgE.

Get your medicines delivered at your doorstep with just a few clicks.
Upload your Prescription

2. IMMUNOTHERAPY
2. Immunotherapy
IMMUNOTHERAPY IS USED FOR SEVERE ALLERGIES OR ALLERGIES THAT DO NOT RESPOND TO STANDARD MEDICATION. THIS INVOLVES A SERIES OF ALLERGEN EXPOSURES VIA INJECTIONS OR TABLETS OVER A FEW YEARS. WITH TIME, THIS HELPS DESENSITIZE THE BODY’S IMMUNE SYSTEM TO THE ALLERGEN AND PREVENTS SEVERE ALLERGIC REACTIONS.
Immunotherapy is used for severe allergies or allergies that do not respond to standard medication. This involves a series of allergen exposures via injections or tablets over a few years. With time, this helps desensitize the body’s immune system to the allergen and prevents severe allergic reactions.
COMPLICATIONS OF LATEX ALLERGY
Complications Of Latex Allergy

Individuals who are more frequently exposed to latex or have a very high sensitization to latex are more likely to developanaphylaxis.
Anaphylactic shock is a severe condition that can block your airways and prevent you from breathing. This is due to the decrease in blood pressure that prevents the heart from receiving enough oxygen. The complications of anaphylaxis include:
Reduced oxygen supply to the brain
Acutekidney failure
Septic shock
Collection of fluid in the air sacs of the lungs
Arrhythmias
Abnormal liver function
Concerned about your liver health? Consider booking a liver function test. This test is a valuable tool for early detection of liver issues like fatty liver disease, cirrhosis, jaundice, and hepatitis, enabling timely intervention and better management of your health.
Book LFT
ALTERNATIVE THERAPIES FOR LATEX ALLERGY
Alternative Therapies For Latex Allergy

While latex allergy necessitates conventional medical management, it's important to note that alternative therapies can potentially enhance immunity and provide additional support to the conventional treatment, offering a ray of hope for better management:
1. NUTRITION AND SUPPLEMENTS
1. Nutrition and supplements
Several nutrients support the immune system and may help to reduce allergic reactions. Common examples are:
Quercetin:It is a flavonoid and antioxidant found in many plants. It is known to reduce allergic reactions.
Vitamin C:It enhances the effect of quercetin by supporting the immune system.
Zinc:Some studies suggest that zinc may help protect against gastrointestinal symptoms accompanying anaphylaxis.
2. YOGA
2. Yoga
Breathing exercises such as pranayam may be beneficial, providing relief from respiratory symptoms of an allergy, such as nasal congestion, runny nose, and breathlessness.

Learn about effective yoga poses to improve oxygen flow in your body.
Tap Now

LIVING WITH LATEX ALLERGY
Living With Latex Allergy

1. TAKE PRECAUTIONS WHILE USING GLOVES
1. Take precautions while using gloves
Gloves are the primary source of allergens. The following measures should be taken to prevent the allergy to latex gloves:
Non-latex gloves should be used for everyday activities such as food preparation, routine housekeeping, and general maintenance, as they are not likely to be in contact with infectious materials.
Use powder-free latex gloves when appropriate barrier protection is necessary, such as while caring for a person with an infectious disease.
2. AVOID THE USE OF LATEX PRODUCTS
2. Avoid the use of latex products
People who have experienced a trigger in the past should avoid products made from natural rubber, such as balloons, condoms, and shoe soles. They should also read the labels before using any product that they think might contain latex.
3. FOLLOW SAFE PRACTICES
3. Follow safe practices
Individuals with latex allergy should follow appropriate work practices to reduce the development of symptoms. These measures include:
Avoid using oil-based hand creams while wearing gloves, as they can deteriorate the gloves
Wash hands thoroughly with soap and water after removing gloves
Clean areas and equipment contaminated with latex-containing dust frequently
4. RECOGNIZE THE SYMPTOMS
4. Recognize the symptoms
Recognizing latex allergy symptoms, including skin rashes, hives, flushing, itching, nasal, eye, or sinus symptoms, and asthma is essential. This helps prevent a more severe reaction and a possible trigger.
5. WEAR MEDICAL IDENTIFICATION
5. Wear medical identification
People who have experienced allergic symptoms to latex in the past should wear a bracelet or necklace depicting their latex allergy. This helps prevent exposure through another person, especially while traveling and at the workplace.
6. CARRY EMERGENCY ESSENTIALS
6. Carry emergency essentials
A person with a latex allergy can experience episodes of anaphylaxis at any time, which can be fatal. So, individuals should carry auto-injectable epinephrine and sterile, non-latex gloves for emergency use. It is also advisable to carry allergy medications, such as antihistamines, asthma medications, and inhalers.

Learn from our experts how to use inhalers.
Watch Now
Did our information help you?In our relentless endeavour to keep improving our services, you are our eyes. Kindly take out sometime to guide us on how to serve your better.Share your feedbackSubscribe to stay informedSubscribe to our carefully crafted informative emailers by Medical Experts and be the first to get the latest health news, tips and important updates.SubmitDisclaimerTata 1mg's sole intention is to ensure that its consumers get information that is expert-reviewed, accurate and trustworthy. However, the information contained herein should NOT be used as a substitute for the advice of a qualified physician. The information provided here is for informational purposes only. This may not cover all possible side effects, drug interactions or warnings or alerts. Please consult your doctor and discuss all your queries related to any disease or medicine. We intend to support, not replace, the doctor-patient relationship.

--- REFERENCES ---

- Nucera E, Aruanno A, Rizzi A, Centrone M. Latex Allergy: Current Status and Future Perspectives. J Asthma Allergy. 2020 Sep 28;13:385-398. doi: 10.2147/JAA.S242058. PMID: 33061465; PMCID: PMC7532063.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7532063/)
- Latex Allergy, Allergy and Immunology, Drugs and Disease,Medscape, Last Updated On:April 28th 2021.  (https://emedicine.medscape.com/article/756632-overview)
- Latex Allergy A Complete Guide To Latex Allergy, Allergy and Asthma Network,  (https://allergyasthmanetwork.org/allergies/latex-allergy/)
- Latex Allergy A Prevention Guide, The National Institute For Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), Center For Disease Control and Prevention. Last Updated On: June 06, 2014.  (https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/docs/98-113/default.html)
- Nguyen K, Kohli A. Latex Allergy. [Updated 2022 Jul 11]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK545164/)
- Katelaris C. Newly updated latex allergy diagnosis and management. World Allergy Organization [Internet]. 2022 [cited 2025 Mar 21]. Available from:  (https://www.worldallergy.org/component/content/article/newly-updated-latex-allergy-diagnosis-and-management-katelaris-c-updated-2022?catid=16&Itemid=101)
