https://www.1mg.com/diseases/liver-cirrhosis-865#

LIVER CIRRHOSIS
Liver cirrhosisAlso known as Hepatic cirrhosis
OVERVIEW
Overview
Cirrhosis is scarring (fibrosis) of the liver caused by long-term liver damage. The scar tissue prevents the liver from performing its function like making protein, helping fight infections, cleaning the blood, helping digest food, and storing energy.

Cirrhosis is usually caused by various factors some of which are hepatitis B and C infections, chronic alcoholism, genetic disorders, and certain infections. Individuals suffering from liver cirrhosis may have few or no symptoms and signs of liver disease initially. Some of the symptoms may be nonspecific, like, weakness, fatigue,nauseaandvomiting, and loss of appetite resulting in weight loss.

Management for liver cirrhosis varies based on the cause and how far the disease has progressed. It mainly focuses on managing symptoms, slowing progression, and addressing the underlying cause. In severe cases, a liver transplant may be needed.
KEY FACTS
Key FactsUsually seen inAdults above 50 years of ageGender affectedBoth men and women but more common in menBody part(s) involvedLiverPrevalenceWorldwide: 2 million (2021)Mimicking ConditionsPseudocirrhosisFulminant hepatic failureMiliary metastasesNecessary health tests/imagingBlood tests:Liver function test (LFT),Kidney function test (KFT),Complete blood count (CBC),Antinuclear antibody (ANA),Anti-smooth muscle antibody (SMA), andAnti-mitochondrial antibody (AMA).Imaging:Abdominal Ultrasound (whole abdomen), Abdominal Computed Tomography (CT), Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI),Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP), Magnetic Resonance Elastography (MRE), and Transient elastography (FibroScan).Upper endoscopyLiver biopsyTreatmentAlcohol dependence:Disulfiram&AcamprosateViral hepatitis:Lamivudine,Entecavir&Tenofovir disoproxil fumarateWilson’s disease:D-penicillamine&TrientinePortal hypertension:PropranololHepatic encephalopathy:Lactulose&RifaximinAscites and edema:Spironolactone&FurosemideInfections:Norfloxacin&CiprofloxacinItching:Cholestyramine&ColesevelamTransjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS)Liver transplantSpecialists to consultGeneral PractitionerGastroenterologistsHepatologistsRelated NGOsIndian society of organ transplantationSee All
SYMPTOMS OF LIVER CIRRHOSIS
Symptoms Of Liver Cirrhosis


Cirrhosis is usually asymptomatic, especially in the initial stages. Some of the initial symptoms if your liver becomes more severely damaged are:Tirednessand weaknessFeeling sickInsomniaNauseaandvomitingLoss of appetiteWeight lossRedness in the palms of the handsMild pain or discomfort in the upper right side of the abdomen

If the liver cirrhosis progresses further, some of the symptoms can include:Small spider-like veins underneath the skinSevereitchingNose bleedingGingivitis(bleeding gums)Jaundice(yellowing of the skin)Vomit containing bloodDark urine or tarry-looking stoolEdema(swelling of legs, ankles, and feet)Ascites(fluid build-up in the stomach)


Prioritize Your Liver Health!
Support your liver with essential care and protection. Explore our liver care products to maintain a healthy, active life.
Shop Now
STAGES OF LIVER CIRRHOSIS
Stages of Liver Cirrhosis

Liver cirrhosis has four stages which will tell the person the seriousness of the liver damage:

STAGE 1: INFLAMMATION
Stage 1: Inflammation
This is the initial stage of liver cirrhosis. The person may feel fatigued or lack vigor or energy. There are no notable symptoms or signs yet at this stage.
STAGE 2: FIBROSIS
Stage 2: Fibrosis
The second stage of liver cirrhosis shows an increase in scar tissue that replaces the healthy liver cells. This leads to the rise in blood pressure within the system of veins in the liver called portal hypertension.
STAGE 3: LIVER CIRRHOSIS
Stage 3: Liver cirrhosis
This stage of liver cirrhosis leads to the accumulation of fluid in the abdominal cavity, referred to as ascites. The volume of fluid accumulation indicates liver damage.
STAGE 4: LIVER FAILURE
Stage 4: Liver failure
The final stage of liver cirrhosis results from immense levels of scar tissue present in the liver. Stage 4 liver cirrhosis presents the same symptoms as stage 3, with the addition of intensified confusion, hand tremors, high fever, changes in personality, infection in the abdominal cavities, and kidney failure that results in infrequent urination.
CAUSES OF LIVER CIRRHOSIS
Causes Of Liver Cirrhosis

Conditions that damage the liver and cause liver cirrhosis include:
1. LONG-TERM HEPATITIS INFECTIONS (CHRONIC)
1. Long-term hepatitis infections (chronic)
A chronic liver infection can lead to damaged liver cells over several years, resulting in cirrhosis.
It is usually hepatitis B and C  infections that mostly cause cirrhosis.


2. CHRONIC ALCOHOLISM
2. Chronic alcoholism
Consumption of alcohol causes inflammation to live cells, effectively poisoning them which results in the build-up of scar tissue in the liver.
Excessive alcohol consumption (often consistently for more than a decade) leads to cirrhosis.


3. NON-ALCOHOLIC FATTY LIVER (OR STEATOHEPATITIS)
3. Non-alcoholic fatty liver (or steatohepatitis)
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) or its severe form, non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), can cause liver cirrhosis by leading to long-term liver damage.
In NASH, excess fat buildup in the liver triggers inflammation and scarring (fibrosis).
Over time, repeated damage and scarring can progress to cirrhosis.


4. TOXIC SUBSTANCES OR MEDICATIONS
4. Toxic substances or medications
Some medications such as Alpha- methyldopa, Amiodarone, Methotrexate, Isoniazid, or certain poisons and environmental toxins can contribute to scarring and damage.


5. INHERITED (GENETIC) DISORDERS
5. Inherited (genetic) disorders
Some genetic conditions affect the liver’s ability to process iron (hemochromatosis) and copper (Wilson’s disease), leading to damage.
Other inherited disorders like cystic fibrosis, alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency, and glycogen storage diseases can also impact liver function.


6. AUTOIMMUNE LIVER DISEASE
6. Autoimmune liver disease
Autoimmune infections occur when instead of attacking invasive organisms the body’s immune system attacks healthy tissues in the body.
Autoimmune hepatitis damages liver cells instead of fighting an infection and causes scarring.


7. CARDIAC CIRRHOSIS
7. Cardiac cirrhosis
The inability of the heart to pump effectively can also cause blood to collect in the liver.
This chronic, passive congestion causes damage to the liver cells, swelling, and pain.


Take care of your heart with our extensive range of products to meet all your needs.
Explore Cardiac Care

8. BILIARY CIRRHOSIS
8. Biliary cirrhosis
Bile is a substance produced by the liver to help the body digest fats and biliary cirrhosis can affect the bile ducts, which help to drain bile.
This can cause bile to back up and finally cause the breakdown of liver function.


9. INFECTIONS
9. Infections
Infections such as congenital or tertiarysyphilis, brucellosis, echinococcosis, and schistosomiasis can cause cirrhosis.


A strong immune system acts as your shield against infections. Explore our wide range of immunity boosters to support your body’s natural defence.
Buy Now

10. IDIOPATHIC/MISCELLANEOUS CAUSES
10. Idiopathic/miscellaneous causes
Idiopathic portal fibrosis:A rare liver condition causing scarring in the portal vein without known causes.
Indian childhood cirrhosis:A severe liver disease in young children, linked to excessive copper buildup in the liver.Polycystic liver disease:A genetic disorder where multiple fluid-filled cysts develop in the liver, sometimes affecting its function.
RISK FACTORS FOR LIVER CIRRHOSIS
Risk Factors For Liver Cirrhosis


The risk factors of liver cirrhosis are:


High cholesterol (due to high cholesterol, the liver can’t be able to break the fatty deposit that can lead to damage to the liver)
Obesity
Excessive alcohol consumption
Pre-existing viral hepatitis
Hypertension (high blood pressure)
Sleep apnea
Gout(it is a form of arthritis caused by the buildup of uric acid crystals in the joints)
Long-term treatment with corticosteroids
Chronic exposure to environmental toxins like arsenic.
DIAGNOSIS OF  LIVER CIRRHOSIS
Diagnosis Of  Liver Cirrhosis


The general diagnostic procedure consists of the following steps:
1. MEDICAL HISTORY
1. Medical history
Your doctor will discuss all the obvious symptoms, the level of severity, the duration of time a you have been experiencing the symptoms, along with a complete medical history.
Your doctor will also assess necessary family history details and any signs of genetic history.


2. PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
2. Physical examination
During a physical examination, your doctor will look for any physical signs of impaired liver function. Also, your doctor will check your abdomen to look for an enlarged spleen or liver.


3. BLOOD TESTS
3. Blood tests
Liver function test (LFT):This test can show abnormal liver enzyme levels, which may be a sign of liver damage.


Kidney function test (KFT):This test will assess creatinine levels. Creatinine is a waste product that will help to determine the normal or abnormal function of the kidneys which can indicate liver damage as well.


Complete Blood Count (CBC):This test may show signs of infection and anemia that may be caused due to internal bleeding.


Other blood tests:Antibodies are screened for hepatitis infections (mainly B and C), blood tests for autoimmune liver conditions, which include theantinuclear antibody (ANA),anti-smooth muscle antibody (SMA), andanti-mitochondrial antibody (AMA) tests.


4. IMAGING TESTS
4. Imaging tests

Ultrasound (whole abdomen):Abdominal ultrasound is a noninvasive, widely available modality that allows for the evaluation of blood flow to and from the liver.


Abdominal computed tomography (CT):This procedure combines special x-ray equipment with computers to produce multiple, detailed digital images of the liver. It can help determine the severity of cirrhosis as well as other liver diseases.


Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI):This imaging technique uses a powerful magnetic field, radio frequency pulses, and a computer to produce detailed pictures of the liver to assess the damage.


Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP):MRCP is a special type of MRI that is used to evaluate a part of the liver and gallbladder.


Magnetic resonance elastography (MRE):This test assesses the stiffness and severity of scarring in the liver. Elastography can detect stiffness of the liver caused by liver fibrosis earlier than other imaging tests. The test can be performed by ultrasound or MRI.


Transient elastography (FibroScan):It helps to quantify liver fibrosis (scarring).


Upper endoscopy:A lighted flexible camera is inserted through the mouth into the upper digestive tract to view enlarged blood vessels that are at risk of bleeding because of liver cirrhosis.


Get reliable and accurate lab tests with Tata 1mg for your health and peace of mind.
Book Your Tests Now

5. LIVER BIOPSY
5. Liver biopsy
In liver biopsy, small tissue samples are taken from the liver with a needle or during surgery.
It is usually considered when other tests have failed to confirm a diagnosis of cirrhosis and the benefit of biopsy outweighs the risk.
PREVENTION OF LIVER CIRRHOSIS
Prevention Of Liver Cirrhosis


Even though the liver is the only organ in the body with regenerative capacity, it is essential to never abuse it and treat it with respect and care. The following steps can be taken for the prevention of liver cirrhosis:

1. LIMIT ALCOHOL INTAKE
1. Limit alcohol intake
Alcohol should always be consumed in moderation.
However, it is always better to completely abstain from alcohol especially in case someone is having some liver disease.


2. DIETARY CONSIDERATIONS
2. Dietary considerations
Your diet should include fruits, vegetables, whole grains, lean protein sources, unsalted nuts and seeds, and low-fat dairy products.
Salt intake should be limited.
Unsaturated fats should be consumed instead of saturated fats and trans fats.
If someone has Hemochromatosis, iron supplements, multivitamins with iron, and Vitamin C supplements need to be avoided.
If someone has Wilson's Disease, foods high in copper need to be eliminated from the diet. These foods include shellfish, organ meats, nuts, chocolate, etc.


3. MAINTAIN A HEALTHY WEIGHT
3. Maintain a healthy weight
An excess amount of body fat can cause damage to your liver.
Always consult a doctor regarding maintenance of weight and weight-loss plan if you are obese or overweight.

Take charge of your health today! Join our weight management program to reduce for customized guidance on weight loss.
Try Now

4. REDUCE THE RISK OF HEPATITIS
4. Reduce the risk of hepatitis
Avoid unprotected sex
Avoid sharing of needles
Do not get tattoos or body piercings in an unsterilized environment. Also, make sure the instruments are properly sterilized and needles are not shared.

Protect yourself and your partner. Always use a condom to prevent sexually transmitted infections.
Buy Here

5. GET VACCINATED
5. Get vaccinated
It is recommended that all infants and high-risk individuals like healthcare providers and rescue personnel should be vaccinated against hepatitis B.
SPECIALIST TO VISIT
Specialist To Visit


A general practitioner can evaluate the causes of liver abnormalities and refer to the following specialists for further assessment and treatment:
Gastroenterologist
Hepatologist

Agastroenterologistspecializes in digestive health and helps manage liver cirrhosis by addressing related gastrointestinal issues and complications.

Ahepatologistfocuses specifically on liver diseases, providing expert care for cirrhosis, including diagnosis, treatment, and advanced liver management.

Early care leads to better health outcomes.Consult an expert doctor today for the right diagnosis and treatment of liver cirrhosis.
Talk Now
TREATMENT OF LIVER CIRRHOSIS
Treatment Of Liver Cirrhosis

Treatment for cirrhosis depends on the cause and extent of your liver damage. The goals of treatment are to slow the progression of scar tissue in the liver. Cirrhosis cannot be cured but treatment focused on preventing further liver damage, easing symptoms, and reducing the impact of complications.
1. TREATMENT OF ALCOHOL DEPENDENCE

1. Treatment of alcohol dependence
People with cirrhosis caused by excessive alcohol should stop consumption of alcohol. If stopping alcohol is difficult, a doctor may recommend a treatment program for alcohol addiction. Some programs are as follows:
Counseling.This helps the individual to focus on how he/she can stop drinking
Rehab programs:It is a program to get help in case of alcohol addiction.
Prescribed medications:Disulfiramandacamprosateare used as prescription medicines for controlling alcohol craving and discomfort.
2. MEDICATIONS

2. Medications
The medication required depends on what has caused the damage to the liver.
If cirrhosis is from long-term viral hepatitis, you may be prescribed antiviral medicines likelamivudine,entecavir, andtenofovir disoproxil fumarate.
If cirrhosis is caused by a copper build-up from Wilson’s disease medicines likeD-penicillamine, andtrientineare used.

In addition to any medication that might be used to treat the underlying cause of cirrhosis, certain medications may be used to treat the complications that can result from cirrhosis:
Portal hypertension:Blood pressure medications can help lower pressure in the portal vein, which brings blood to the liver. Lowering pressure in the portal vein can reduce the risk of internal bleeding and damage to the spleen.Propranololis one of the commonly used medicines.
Hepatic encephalopathy:Lactuloseis alaxativethat can help reduce the absorption of substances that can be harmful to the brain. Antibiotics likerifaximinare also used in hepatic encephalopathy.
Ascites and edema:Diureticssuch asspironolactoneorfurosemidemay be prescribed to reduce the accumulation of fluid in the abdomen or legs.
Infections:Antibiotics may be prescribed to prevent or treat infections. Examples include norfloxacin and ciprofloxacin.
Itching:Drugs that may be used to relieve itching associated with liver cirrhosis includecholestyramineandcolesevelam. Both of these drugs are also used to lower high blood cholesterol levels.
Malnutrition andosteoporosis:Nutritional supplements may be prescribed to counter malnutrition associated with cirrhosis and to prevent weak bones or osteoporosis.


3. TRANSJUGULAR INTRAHEPATIC PORTOSYSTEMIC SHUNT (TIPS)
3. Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS)
This procedure is used to treat portal hypertension caused by cirrhosis.
A small tube or stent is placed into the liver to bypass blood flow into the liver by directing it back towards the heart.


4. LIVER TRANSPLANTATION
4. Liver transplantation
In advanced cases of cirrhosis, when the liver ceases to function, a liver transplant is the last treatment option.
A liver transplant is a procedure to replace a liver with a healthy liver from a deceased donor or with part of a liver from a living donor.
Candidates for liver transplants have extensive testing to determine whether they are healthy enough to have a good outcome following surgery.
HOME-CARE FOR LIVER CIRRHOSIS
Home-care For Liver Cirrhosis

Some home remedies may support liver health and aid in managing liver cirrhosis, but they are not a substitute for medical treatment. A conventional approach is essential, so always consult your doctor before trying anything new. Some of them include:Papaya(papita) seeds:According to Ayurveda, papaya seeds can help in the treatment of cirrhosis of the liver by aiding liver detoxification.

How To Use It?
Grind some fresh papaya seeds to extract 1 tablespoon of juice, add two tablespoons of lemon juice, and drink this mixture twice a day for a month to improve liver function.

Vitamin C:It can have protective effects against liver damage. It can also prevent fatty buildup and cirrhosis.

How To Use It?
Include vitamin C-rich foods like blackberries, lemons, and oranges in your diet.

Unable to meet your Vitamin C requirements through diet? Try orange of Vitamin supplements to fill the nutritional gap after consulting with your doctor.
Buy Here
Turmeric(haldi):It is a rich source of antiseptics, with antibacterial, antifungal, and antioxidant properties and can do wonders in managing symptoms of liver diseases.

How To Use It?
Add a tablespoon of turmeric in hot milk with honey and drink it regularly to see results.

Shop For Turmeric Products
Apple cider vinegar (ACV):The ACV can help improve fat metabolism. It can also work as a detoxifying agent for the liver.

How To Use It?
Take a glass of water and add a tablespoon of ACV and a teaspoon of honey to it. Drink this mixture for a healthy liver.
Buy Apple Cider Vinegar HereGreen tea:It is loaded with antioxidants and has a protective effect against liver diseases.

Looking for some good quality green tea options?
Find Them Here
Milk thistle:It is a Mediterranean herb, that has been used for centuries to treat liver problems. It can help in removing toxins from the body that are processed through the liver.
LIVING WITH LIVER CIRRHOSIS
Living With Liver Cirrhosis


The diagnosis of liver cirrhosis can be an emotional ride for most people. Some essential tips that can help those living with liver cirrhosis include:
FOLLOW A LIVER-FRIENDLY DIET
Follow a liver-friendly diet
Eat a balanced diet rich in fruits, vegetables, whole grains, and lean proteins while avoiding processed foods, excess salt, and unhealthy fats.


LIMIT ALCOHOL AND AVOID TOXINS
Limit alcohol and avoid toxins
Completely avoid alcohol and be cautious with medications, as the liver processes them. Always consult your doctor before taking any new medications or supplements.


BE MINDFUL OF YOUR WATER AND SALT INTAKE
Be mindful of your water and salt intake
Drink plenty of water to support liver function and overall health. Reduce salt consumption to prevent fluid retention and swelling (ascites).


SCHEDULE REGULAR CHECK-UPS
Schedule regular check-ups
This can help catch any new symptoms and manage complications early.


PRACTICE GOOD HYGIENE
Practice good hygiene
Wash hands regularly and follow hygiene practices to reduce the risk of infections.


Safeguard yourself and your loved ones with our exclusive range of hand washes and sanitisers.
Fill Your Cart Now

TAKE CARE OF YOUR MENTAL HEALTH
Take care of your mental health
Chronic illness can be emotionally challenging. Seek support from healthcare providers, counsellors, or support groups.

You can also try our natural mind care products after consulting with your doctor to get the calm you deserve.
Shop Here
COMPLICATIONS OF LIVER CIRRHOSIS
Complications Of Liver Cirrhosis


If cirrhosis progresses it can lead to complications like:

Portal hypertension:Cirrhosis slows blood flow through the liver, increasing pressure in the portal vein, which carries blood from the digestive organs.


Swollen or bleeding veins:Increased portal pressure redirects blood to smaller veins, causing swelling in the esophagus or stomach, which may lead to bleeding.


Fluid retention in the tummy or legs:Portal hypertension and reduced blood proteins like albumin cause fluid buildup in the abdomen(ascites) and legs (edema).


Hepatic encephalopathy:The liver struggles to remove toxins, leading to their buildup in the brain, causing confusion, drowsiness, and concentration issues.


Bleeding:Cirrhosis impairs clotting factor production, increasing the risk of excessive bleeding from cuts, surgeries, or dental procedures.


Splenomegaly (Enlarged spleen):Portal hypertension enlarges the spleen, trapping white blood cells and platelets, often detected through blood tests.


Jaundice:Cirrhosis prevents bilirubin elimination, leading to yellowing of the skin, eyes, and mucous membranes.


Infections:Weakened immunity from cirrhosis increases infection risk, and fluid retention in the abdomen can cause bacterial peritonitis.


Osteoporosis:Some cirrhosis patients experience bone loss, raising their risk of fractures.


Diabetes:Cirrhosis can worsen type 2 diabetes by increasing insulin resistance, making blood sugar harder to control.


Liver cancer:Cirrhosis raises the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), making regular screenings essential for early detection.

Quality cancer care should never be left to chance. We, at Tata 1mg, are committed to offering the support, resources, and guidance needed to navigate every step of the journey.
Explore The PlatformDid our information help you?In our relentless endeavour to keep improving our services, you are our eyes. Kindly take out sometime to guide us on how to serve your better.Share your feedbackSubscribe to stay informedSubscribe to our carefully crafted informative emailers by Medical Experts and be the first to get the latest health news, tips and important updates.SubmitDisclaimerTata 1mg's sole intention is to ensure that its consumers get information that is expert-reviewed, accurate and trustworthy. However, the information contained herein should NOT be used as a substitute for the advice of a qualified physician. The information provided here is for informational purposes only. This may not cover all possible side effects, drug interactions or warnings or alerts. Please consult your doctor and discuss all your queries related to any disease or medicine. We intend to support, not replace, the doctor-patient relationship.

--- REFERENCES ---

- Schuppan D, Afdhal NH. Liver cirrhosis. Lancet. 2008 Mar 8  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2271178/ )
- Suk KT, Kim DJ. Staging of liver fibrosis or cirrhosis: The role of hepatic venous pressure gradient measurement. World J Hepatol. 2015 Mar 27  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4381184/ )
- Olave MC, Gurung A, Mistry PK, Kakar S, Yeh M, Xu M, Wu TT, Torbenson M, Jain D. Etiology of cirrhosis in the young. Hum Pathol. 2020 Feb  (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31698008/ )
- Overview. Cirrhosis. National Health Service. June 2020  (https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/cirrhosis/ )
- Moon DB, Lee SG. Liver transplantation. Gut Liver. 2009 Sep;3  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2852711/ )
- What is chronic liver disease. Overview. Stanford Health Care.  (https://stanfordhealthcare.org/medical-conditions/liver-kidneys-and-urinary-system/chronic-liver-disease.html)
- Rahimi RS, Rockey DC. Complications of cirrhosis. Curr Opin Gastroenterol. 2012 May  (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22343347/)
- Definition & Facts for Cirrhosis. Cirrhosis. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Disease.March 2018.  (https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/liver-disease/cirrhosis/definition-facts )
- LiverTox: Clinical and Research Information on Drug-Induced Liver Injury [Internet]. Bethesda (MD): National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases; 2012-. Turmeric. [Updated 2024 Jun 1]. Available from:  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK548561/ )
- Mulrow C, Lawrence V, Jacobs B, et al. Milk Thistle: Effects on Liver Disease and Cirrhosis and Clinical Adverse Effects: Summary. 2000. In: AHRQ Evidence Report Summaries. Rockville (MD): Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (US); 1998-2005. 21. Available from:  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK11896/ )
- Deenin W, Malakul W, Boonsong T, Phoungpetchara I, Tunsophon S. Papaya improves non-alcoholic fatty liver disease in obese rats by attenuating oxidative stress, inflammation and lipogenic gene expression. World J Hepatol. 2021 Mar 27;13(3):315-327. Available from:  (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8006076/ )
- He Z, Li X, Yang H, Wu P, Wang S, Cao D, Guo X, Xu Z, Gao J, Zhang W, Luo X. Effects of Oral Vitamin C Supplementation on Liver Health and Associated Parameters in Patients With Non-Alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease: A Randomized Clinical Trial. Front Nutr. 2021 Sep 14;8:745609.Available from:  (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8478121/)
- Nazıroğlu M, Güler M, Özgül C, Saydam G, Küçükayaz M, Sözbir E. Apple cider vinegar modulates serum lipid profile, erythrocyte, kidney, and liver membrane oxidative stress in ovariectomized mice fed high cholesterol. J Membr Biol. 2014;247(8):667-673. Available from:  (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24894721/)
- LiverTox: Clinical and Research Information on Drug-Induced Liver Injury [Internet]. Bethesda (MD): National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases; 2012-. Green Tea. [Updated 2020 Nov 20]. Available from:  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK547925/ )
- Moon AM, Singal AG, Tapper EB. Contemporary Epidemiology of Chronic Liver Disease and Cirrhosis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2020 Nov;18(12):2650-2666. Available from  (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7007353/ )
- Indian Society of Organ Transplantation. ISOT – Indian Society of Organ Transplantation [Internet]. Available from:  (https://isot.co.in/)
