https://www.1mg.com/diseases/lung-cancer-218#

LUNG CANCER
Lung cancerAlso known as Lung carcinoma, Lung tumor, and Cancer of the lungs
OVERVIEW
Overview
Cancer occurs when the body’s cells grow uncontrollably and may spread to other parts of the body. Lung cancer starts in the lungs, often in airway cells, and can quickly spread to areas like lymph nodes, the brain, the liver, bones, and adrenal glands.

In the initial stages, lung cancer does not show any symptoms. Symptoms that appear at an advanced stage usually include a persistent cough that doesn't go away, spotting blood while coughing, shortness of breath, hoarseness, losing weight, chest pain, and headache.

Smoking is the primary risk factor for lung cancer, though exposure to radon gas, asbestos, air pollution, and family history also increase the risk. Quitting smoking greatly lowers the chances of developing this disease. Treatment modalities can include a combination of surgery, chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and immunotherapy.
KEY FACTS
Key FactsUsually seen inAge above 70 yearsGender affectedBoth men and womenBody part(s) involvedBronchiLungsLymph nodesHeartSpineMimicking ConditionsPneumoniaAsthmaChronic obstructive pulmonary diseaseBronchitisPleural effusionPneumothoraxTuberculosisAcid refluxNecessary health tests/imagingImaging:X-ray,CT scan,MRI, andPET scan.Tissue sampling:Fine Needle Aspiration Biopsy (FNAC), Bronchoscopy, and ThoracoscopyTreatmentRadiotherapyImmunotherapyChemotherapyTargeted drug therapySurgerySpecialists to consultGeneral physicianOncologistPulmonoligist
SYMPTOMS OF LUNG CANCER
Symptoms Of Lung Cancer

Like other cancers, the symptoms of lung cancer become more evident in the later stages of the disease than in earlier stages. Patients usually notice these symptoms when the disease advances to the higher stages. A few symptoms seen in lung cancer include the following.


A persistentcoughthat doesn't go away
Spotting blood incough
Hoarseness
Losing weight for no evident reason
Headache
Bone pain
Trouble in breathing
Shortness of breath
Chest pain
Persistent or recurrent chest infection
Trouble during swallowing
Wheezing
Loss of appetite
Tiredness
Swelling of the face and veins
Finger clubbing (thickening and rounding of the fingertips)
Swelling of lymph nodes around and above the collarbone
Thrombocytosis (excessive production of platelets)

Diagnosis of cancer can be life-changing. We at Tata 1mg have curated a platform to access quality care and help you sail through this journey.
Explre Cancer Care Platform
TYPES OF LUNG CANCER
Types Of Lung Cancer

Generally, the most common types of lung cancer are seen in the lungs itself, other rarer types of cancer may also occur outside the lungs and chest wall. Types of lung cancer include:

1. NON-SMALL CELL LUNG CANCER (NSCLC)
1. Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
Adenocarcinoma:A type of lung cancer that starts in mucus-secreting cells, common in smokers and non-smokers, often affecting women, younger people, and found in the outer lung areas.

Squamous cell carcinoma:A lung cancer that begins in flat cells lining the airways, often linked to smoking and typically found near the main airway in the center of the lungs.

Large cell carcinoma:A fast-growing lung cancer that can develop in any part of the lung, making it more challenging to treat.

2. SMALL CELL LUNG CANCER (SCLC)
2. Small cell lung cancer (SCLC)
SCLC (Small Cell Lung Cancer) is mostly seen in heavy smokers and is rare in non-smokers.
It accounts for about 10-15% of lung cancer cases and is also called oat cell cancer.
SCLC grows and spreads faster than other types, with 70% diagnosed after it has spread.

3. OTHER TYPES
3. Other types
Mesothelioma:A rare cancer of the chest lining caused by asbestos exposure, developing 30-50 years after exposure and accounting for about 5% of lung cancer cases.

Chest wall Tumors:Rare tumors in the chest wall, which can be cancerous and require treatment based on location and symptoms.

Metastatic lung cancer:Cancers that originate elsewhere in the body and spread to the lungs in later stages; common cancer types include:
Bladder cancer
Breast cancer
Colon cancer
Kidney cancer
Neuroblastoma (cancer of immature nerve cells)
Sarcoma
Wilms' tumor (kidney cancer in children)
Prostate cancer

Diagnosis of cancer can be life-changing!
We at Tata 1mg have curated a platform to access quality care and help you sail through this journey.
Explore The Platform
CAUSES OF LUNG CANCER
Causes Of Lung Cancer

Smoking is the primary cause of lung cancer, including first-hand smoking and long-term exposure to second-hand smoke.
Smoking damages the lung lining with carcinogens in cigarette smoke, leading to cancer over time.
While the body initially repairs the damage, repeated exposure causes permanent harm, leading to cancer development.
Other factors that can increase the likelihood of lung cancer are discussed in the next segment.

Here’s more on how smoking can affect your lungs.
Read Now
RISK FACTORS FOR LUNG CANCER
Risk Factors For Lung Cancer

A risk factor is anything that increases a person’s chance of getting a disease . Risk factors for lung cancan can be classified into the following:

1. MODIFIABLE RISK FACTORS
1. Modifiable risk factors
Exposure to radon gas
Exposure to asbestos
Exposure at the workplace (inhaled chemicals such as arsenic, beryllium, cadmium, silica, diesel exhaust, etc)
Diet (with low antioxidants like vitamins A, C, and E linked to lung cancer risk)

Unable to meet the dietary requirements of basic vitamins and minerals. Explore our widest range of supplements to meet all your needs.
Buy Here


2. NON-MODIFIABLE RISK FACTORS
2. Non-modifiable risk factors
Family history
Previous history of lung diseases (such asasthma, chronic obstructive lung disorder (COPD), andtuberculosis).
Gender (Smoking prevalence is higher among men than women. This is the leading cause of lung cancer)
Air pollutionDid you know?
Air pollution not just affects your lungs but it can have an impact on your whole body. You can now evaluate your health risks from pollution exposure with just a simple test.Book Pollution Risk Check Advance
DIAGNOSIS OF LUNG CANCER
Diagnosis Of Lung Cancer

If your doctor suspects lung cancer, they will advise a series of tests to confirm the diagnosis.

1. IMAGING TESTS
1. Imaging tests
X-ray:Helps identify abnormal masses or nodules in the lungs that may suggest the presence of cancer.
High-Resolution Computed Tomography (HRCT) Scan:Provides detailed cross-sectional images of the lungs, helping detect small tumors or assess the extent of lung cancer.
MRI:Offers detailed images of soft tissues, useful for evaluating the spread of cancer to the brain or spinal cord.
PET scan:Identifies highly active cancer cells in the body by detecting areas with increased glucose metabolism, shown as "hot spots."

2. TISSUE SAMPLES
2. Tissue samples
Fine Needle Aspiration Biopsy (FNAC):Helps extract tissue or fluid from suspicious areas for microscopic examination to confirm the presence of cancer cells.
Bronchoscopy:Enables direct visualization of airways and collection of tissue samples from lesions for further analysis.
Thoracoscopy:Provides access to less accessible lung areas, allowing for the removal of tissue samples for an accurate diagnosis.

Looking for a lab to get all your tests done?
Book With Tata 1MG
PREVENTION OF LUNG CANCER
Prevention Of Lung Cancer

There is no certain way through which one can prevent lung cancer. However, there are certain steps that a person can take to reduce their risk of getting lung cancer.
1. STOP SMOKING
1. Stop smoking
Quitting smoking at any stage significantly lowers the risk of lung cancer.

Want To Quit Smoking? Try our exclusive range of smoking cessation products to get rid of this deadly habit.
Quit Today

2. STAY  AWAY FROM SECONDHAND SMOKE
2. Stay  away from secondhand smoke
Minimize exposure to secondhand smoke by encouraging others to smoke outdoors and avoiding confined areas with smokers.

Secondhand smoke is not as dangerous as active smoking. Here are 20 common smoking myths busted!
Click To Know

3. TEST YOUR HOME FOR RADON
3. Test your home for radon
Ensure safe radon levels at home by contacting local authorities for testing and remediation.


4. AVOID CARCINOGENS
4. Avoid carcinogens
Follow safety protocols to limit exposure to harmful substances like asbestos and toxic chemicals at work.


5. EAT A HEALTHY DIET
5. Eat a healthy diet
Consume a nutrient-rich diet with fruits and vegetables while consulting a doctor about supplements.

Here are 5 superfoods that fight cancer and gift you a healthy life.
Click To Know

6. TRY CHEMOPREVENTION
6. Try chemoprevention
Consider preventive treatments that inhibit or reverse the development of cancer.
Research and tests on molecular changes can guide cancer prevention strategies.


7. LOWER WORKPLACE RISKS
7. Lower workplace risks
Take precautions to avoid harmful chemicals at work that can increase lung cancer risk.


8. EXERCISE REGULARLY
8. Exercise regularly
Engage in physical activity, like walking for 30 minutes daily, to improve overall health and reduce cancer risk.Did you know?
Walking may improve the quality of life for people with advanced cancer. Click here to read more!Click To Read
SPECIALIST TO VISIT
Specialist To Visit

If you experience symptoms like shortness of breath, persistent coughing, blood in sputum, chest pain, or fatigue, consult a doctor to identify the underlying cause. You can visit:
General physician
Oncologist
Pulmonologist

Ageneral physicianprovides an initial evaluation and refers you to specialists for further diagnosis.


Anoncologistspecializes in diagnosing and treating cancer, including lung cancer.


Apulmonologistfocuses on lung health and treats conditions affecting the respiratory system.

Consult India's best doctors online.
Click Here


TREATMENT OF LUNG CANCER
Treatment Of Lung Cancer

Cancer treatment is based on its stage and extent, determined through tests like PET scans, CT, and MRI, with options tailored to your health and specific needs. Treatment options include:
1. SURGERY
1. Surgery
Wedge resection:In this, a small section of the lung is removed to resect the cancer cells along with a margin of healthy tissue.
Segmental resection:This allows a doctor to remove a larger area of the lung, whereas a lobectomy involves removing the entire affected lobe of the lung.
Pneumonectomy:This procedure involves the removal of an entire lung.

Note:In the advanced stages of cancer, the lymph nodes may also get affected. In such cases, the surgeon may remove some lymph nodes to check for the signs of the spread of cancer.


2. RADIATION THERAPY
2. Radiation therapy
This is a treatment modality that uses high-powered energy beams that work as an effective treatment to kill cancer cells.
During a radiation therapy appointment, the patient is asked to lie flat on a table. A large machine that emits the energy beam moves around the body and aims the beam at precise points.
Radiation therapy is often recommended for patients who have localized lung cancer and can also be recommended after surgery to remove the affected tissue.


3. CHEMOTHERAPY
3. Chemotherapy
Chemotherapy treatment is a treatment modality that uses strong medicines that are effective in killing cancer cells.
These drugs circulate the body and aim at destroying cancer cells that may have traveled from the original tumor.
Patients are given a combination of medications over months or weeks where the medicines travel in the body via a vein or are given orally.
Chemotherapy also helps in reducing the size of the tumours hence making it easier for surgeons to remove the mass completely.


4. STEREOTACTIC BODY RADIOTHERAPY
4. Stereotactic body radiotherapy
Radiotherapy, also known as stereotactic body radiotherapy, is an intense form of radiation treatment in which the cancer is subjected to several beams of radiation from different angles.
It can also be used to treat cancer that has spread to other parts of the body.

5. TARGETED DRUG THERAPY
5. Targeted Drug therapy
Targeted drug therapy is often considered a treatment option for people with recurrent cancer or advanced cancer.
These drugs block the abnormalities and hence can cause the cancer cells to die.
Before undergoing targeted therapy, your tumor cells may be sent for testing in laboratories to check which drug is right for you.


6. IMMUNOTHERAPY
6. Immunotherapy
Immunotherapy takes the help of the body’s immune system to help in fighting cancer.
Cancer cells can produce proteins to hide from the immune system, making it harder for the body to attack them.
Immunotherapy helps the immune system recognize and destroy these cancer cells, often used for advanced or metastatic lung cancers.

Order all your medications from India’s largest online pharmacy.
Order Here
HOME-CARE FOR LUNG CANCER
Home-care For Lung Cancer
Certain herbal remedies may offer support in managing lung cancer, but it's essential to consult your doctor before trying anything new to ensure they don't interfere with your treatment plan. Some natural remedies that have shown potential benefits include:

Pomegranate(Anar):Helps stop tumor growth and blood vessel formation in cancer by reducing harmful signals and markers.

Turmericroot (Haldi ki Jad):Slows tumor growth and blocks blood supply to cancer by targeting specific proteins.

Learn more about 5 ways to use turmeric for a healthier you.
Read This Now

Green Tea:Lowers blood vessel formation in lung cancer by reducing specific markers.
Buy Green Tea Here
COMPLICATIONS OF LUNG CANCER
Complications Of Lung Cancer

Lung cancer can lead to various complications due to its spread or as a side effect of treatments. These include:

Superior vena cava syndrome:Tumors in the upper right lung can block blood flow, causing dizziness, facial swelling, and fainting.
Metastasis:Cancer can spread to organs like the brain, bones, or adrenal glands, commonly in advanced stages.
Lung infections:Reduced immunity from cancer or its treatment increases the risk of infections likebronchitisorpneumonia.
Heart blockage:Cancer spreading to the heart can compress veins and arteries, causing fluid buildup, arrhythmias, orheart attacks.
Hypercalcemia:High calcium levels in the blood can cause vomiting, excessive thirst, and stomach pain.
Blood clots: Lung cancer raises the risk of clots, potentially causing fatalpulmonary embolismif they travel to the lungs.
Neuropathy:Tumors in the lung's apex may cause arm and shoulder pain or Horner's syndrome with droopy eyelids and pupil changes.
Spinal cord compression:Cancer spreading to the spine can cause back pain, weakness, and vertebrae compression, affecting 28% of lung cancer patients.Did you know?
In India, only 15-20% of lung cancer cases are detected in the early stages. Read about things you should know about lung cancer to avoid complications.Click Now
ALTERNATIVE THERAPIES FOR LUNG CANCER
Alternative Therapies For Lung Cancer

Lung cancer requires conventional medical treatment. However, some patients feel that a complementary approach via alternative therapies can help in the management of the side effects caused during the treatment. These consist of:
ACUPUNCTURE
Acupuncture
Acupuncture involves the insertion of needles through the skin at specific points on the body.
It can provide relief for patients and also ease symptoms such asnauseaandvomiting, which are common side effects of cancer treatments.
AROMATHERAPY
Aromatherapy
It uses a mix of essential oils for massages that can make a person feel relaxed.
Often patients feel that alternative therapies such as aromatherapy help them cope with the treatment of cancer and allow them to feel relaxed.
HYPNOSIS
Hypnosis
Hypnosis is carried out by a therapist who will help you through certain relaxation exercises that can encourage positive and relaxing thoughts.
It also helps in reducing nausea andanxietyseen in people with cancer.
MEDITATION
Meditation
Can help you center your thoughts and promote the feeling of calmness and acceptance.
Meditation is said to improve the quality of life and improve a person's mental state.


Note:Practising meditation for just 10-15 minutes a day can go a long way in protecting you against diseases or helping manage them better.

Read about 6 ways how meditation can improve your life.
Click Here

LIVING WITH LUNG CANCER
Living With Lung Cancer

Cancer affects your day-to-day life and also affects the following months of your life. Here are a few things to keep in mind.
1. TAKE CARE OF YOURSELF
1. Take care of yourself
Preparing for lung cancer treatment can feel overwhelming, but focusing on self-care can help.
Maintain a healthy, balanced diet with plenty of fruits and vegetables, ensure you get restful sleep, and practice stress-reducing activities like meditation.
Consult your doctor for personalized strategies to help your body prepare for the treatment effectively.


2. CONSERVE YOUR ENERGY
2. Conserve your energy
Fatigue is common during cancer treatment.
Prioritize essential tasks and seek support from family members to manage daily activities.


3. COPE WITH EMOTIONS
3. Cope with emotions
Living with lung cancer can bring up emotions.
To keep yourself emotionally healthy during your journey, talk to your friends and family, talk to other people in the same situation.


4. GET HELP FROM SUPPORT GROUPS
4. Get help from support groups
There are lots of active support groups for patients and family caregivers, so no one has to face a lung cancer diagnosis alone.

Take control of your cancer journey with expert support and resources. Join our platform for guidance on treatment, nutrition, financial aid, and recovery.
Sign Up TodayDid our information help you?In our relentless endeavour to keep improving our services, you are our eyes. Kindly take out sometime to guide us on how to serve your better.Share your feedbackSubscribe to stay informedSubscribe to our carefully crafted informative emailers by Medical Experts and be the first to get the latest health news, tips and important updates.SubmitDisclaimerTata 1mg's sole intention is to ensure that its consumers get information that is expert-reviewed, accurate and trustworthy. However, the information contained herein should NOT be used as a substitute for the advice of a qualified physician. The information provided here is for informational purposes only. This may not cover all possible side effects, drug interactions or warnings or alerts. Please consult your doctor and discuss all your queries related to any disease or medicine. We intend to support, not replace, the doctor-patient relationship.

--- REFERENCES ---

- Bradley SH, Kennedy MPT, Neal RD. Recognising Lung Cancer in Primary Care [published correction appears in Adv Ther. 2020 Apr.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6318240/ )
- Risk factors. Lung Cancer Causes, Risk Factors, and Prevention. American Cancer Society. Oct 2019.  (https://www.cancer.org/content/dam/CRC/PDF/Public/8704.00.pdf )
- Lung Cancer: Epidemiology, Aetiology, and Prevention. Charles S. Dela Cruz, MD, PhDa,*Lynn T. Tanoue.Clin Chest Med. 2011 December.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3864624/pdf/nihms468128.pdf )
- Non-small cell lung cancer. National Comprehensive Cancer Network. Jan 2020.  (https://www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/default.aspx. )
- Niederhuber JE, et al., eds. Cancer of the lung: Non-small cell lung cancer and small cell lung cancer. In: Abeloff's Clinical Oncology. 6th ed. Elsevier; Jan 2020.  (https://www.clinicalkey.com )
- National Cancer Institute. Physician Data Query (PDQ). Health Professional Version. Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Treatment. Jun 2019.  (https://www.cancer.gov/types/lung/hp/non-small-cell-lung-treatment-pdq )
- Lung cancer prevention (PDQ). National Cancer Institute. Mar 2020.  (https://www.cancer.gov/types/lung/patient/lung-prevention-pdq )
- Lung cancer — non-small cell: Screening. American Society of Clinical Oncology. Mar                          2020.  (https://www.cancer.net/cancer-types/lung-cancer-non-small-cell/screening )
- Yang Y, Li N, Wang TM, Di L. Natural Products with Activity against Lung Cancer: A Review Focusing on the Tumor Microenvironment. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Oct 7;22(19):10827. Available from:  (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8509218/)
- Cassileth BR, Deng GE, Gomez JE, et al. Complementary therapies and integrative oncology in lung cancer: ACCP evidence-based clinical practice guidelines (2nd edition). Chest. 2007;132(3 Suppl):340S-354S. Available from:  (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17873179/ )
