https://www.1mg.com/diseases/myocarditis-945#

MYOCARDITIS
MyocarditisAlso known as Inflammatory cardiomyopathy, Idiopathic myocarditis, and Viral cardiomyopathy
OVERVIEW
Overview
Myocarditis is a medical condition in which the myocardium, a heart muscle, gets inflamed. It is a rare cardiovascular disease that enlarges the heart, degenerates the heart muscle cells, and develops scar tissues. These factors force the heart to work harder to supply blood and oxygen all over the body. Some of the common symptoms of myocarditis include chest pain, irregular or rapid heartbeat, difficulty breathing, accumulation of fluid with swelling in lower extremities,fever,fatigue, etc.

Myocarditis is likely to affect anyone, regardless of age. Various possible agents like viruses, bacteria, fungi, parasites, autoimmune responses, and certain medications can trigger this condition.

Myocarditis can resolve on its own without treatment. Treating the underlying cause, such as using antibiotics for bacterial infections, can ensure full recovery. Specific medications or hospitalization may be required to effectively manage severe or prolonged cases.
KEY FACTS
Key FactsUsually seen inAll age groupsGender affectedBoth men and womenBody part(s) involvedHeartPrevalenceWorldwide:10.2 to 105.6 per 100,000 (2021)Mimicking ConditionsCarnitine deficiencyCoarctation of the aortaCoronary artery anomaliesCardiac tumorDilated cardiomyopathyEndocardial fibroelastosisViral pericarditisPericarditisAcute coronary syndromeCoronary artery diseaseCongestiveheart failurePericardial effusionNecessary health tests/imagingBlood tests:Creatine kinase,Total leukocyte count:CRP&ESR.Imaging tests:Electrocardiography,Chest X-ray,Echocardiography&Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)Biopsy:Heart biopsy & Endomyocardial biopsyMicro-RNA profilingTreatmentAntibiotics:Amoxycillin&DoxycyclineCorticosteroids:Cyclosporine&PrednisoneHeart failure therapy:Enalapril (ACE inhibitor),Lisinopril (ACE inhibitor)&Metoprolol (Beta-blocker)Antiviral medicines:Ribavirinor interferonsIVIG (Intravenous immunoglobulin)Heart transplantSpecialists to consultGeneral physicianCardiologistsCardiothoracic surgeonsSee All
SYMPTOMS OF MYOCARDITIS
Symptoms Of Myocarditis

People with myocarditis may not show any noticeable symptoms initially. Some of the common symptoms may include:

SYMPTOMS IN ADULTS
Symptoms in adults
Chest pain or discomfort
Difficulty breathing or shortness of breath
Edema(swelling in ankles, legs, or feet)
Palpitations or abnormal heartbeat
Infection-related fever
Flu-like symptoms (sore throat,headache,body aches,joint pain)


SYMPTOMS IN CHILDREN OR INFANTS
Symptoms in children or infants
Poor appetite
Stomach ache
Weakness
Chroniccough
Rashes
Fever
Diarrhea
Sore throat
Difficulty breathing
Joint painDid you know?
Severe COVID-19 can cause new-onset heart failure even without prior cardiovascular disease. Symptoms like cough, fever, difficulty breathing, chest pain, and palpitations may result from COVID-19 itself, leading to a silent presentation of COVID-19 myocarditis.

Want to get more information on COVID-19?Read Now
CAUSES OF MYOCARDITIS
Causes Of Myocarditis


Myocarditis is a rare health condition. The causes are discussed below:
1. VIRUSES
1. Viruses
Viral infections are among the most prevalent causes of myocarditis (viral myocarditis). These include influenza virus, adenovirus, COVID-19, and Coxsackie B virus, to name a few.

2. BACTERIAS
2. Bacterias
The bacteria that may cause inflammation of the myocardium include corynebacterium, meningococci, streptococci, clostridia, etc.

3. FUNGI
3. Fungi
Although rare, fungal myocarditis can occur due to infections caused by various fungi including candida, aspergillus, and histoplasma.

4. PARASITES
4. Parasites
Certain parasites, such as Trypanosoma cruzi, Toxoplasma, and Trichinella, can cause myocarditis, with Chagas' disease being the most significant parasitic heart infection.
5. HYPERSENSITIVITY OR TOXIC REACTION

5. Hypersensitivity or toxic reaction
Toxic myocarditis may be triggered by medications such as
Dobutamine
Phenytoin
Antibiotics (ampicillin, cephalosporins, tetracyclines, etc)
Psychiatric medications (tricyclic antidepressants, benzodiazepines, etc)
Recreational/illicit drugs (methamphetamine and cocaine)
Heavy metals (copper, lead, and arsenicals)
Anti-cancer medications (anthracyclines, cyclophosphamide, 5-fluorouracil, etc)
6. AUTOIMMUNE CONDITIONS

6. Autoimmune conditions
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Rheumatoid arthritis


7. IDIOPATHIC MYOCARDITIS
7. Idiopathic myocarditis
When inflammation of the heart muscle develops without any identified cause, it is called an idiopathic condition.Did you know?
A large number of young urban Indians are at risk of heart disease. Discover the reasons behind the rising heart disorders among young Indians.Read This
RISK FACTORS FOR MYOCARDITIS
Risk Factors for Myocarditis

The risk factors for myocarditis include the following:

1. NON-MODIFIABLE FACTORS
1. Non-modifiable factors
Age (can affect all ages, but mostly occurs in young adults)Family history and genetics
Gender (men are often more prone to developing myocarditis than women).

Know the 4 major risk factors for heart disease in women.
Tap Here

2. MEDICAL CONDITIONS
2. Medical conditions
HIV infections/AIDS
COVID 19
Eating disorders such asanorexia nervosa
Skin injuries caused by burns or infectionsDiabetes


Stay on top of your health—monitor your blood sugar regularly to prevent complications.
Explore Diabetes Monitors

3. LIFESTYLE CHOICES
3. Lifestyle choices
Excessive consumption of alcohol
Use cocaine, amphetamines, or intravenous recreational drugs


4. OTHER CAUSES
4. Other causes
Poor dental health

Don't let poor dental health lead to serious issues. Discover our wide range of oral care products and elevate your oral hygiene today!
Shop Now

Chest injury
End-stage kidney disease
Chagas disease, prevalent in Central and South America, causes myocarditis and is spread by parasitic insects

Learn about 7 key risk factors for heart disease and how to manage them.
Click To Find Out
DIAGNOSIS OF MYOCARDITIS
Diagnosis Of Myocarditis

After a physical checkup and evaluation of medical history, the doctor may recommend the following tests to confirm the diagnosis:
1. BLOOD TESTS
1. Blood tests
Creatine kinase(CK):It is a blood test that checks the level of CK in the blood. If it is more than the normal range, it might indicate an infection in the myocardium.

Total leukocyte count:Abnormal WBC (white blood cells) count can help diagnose myocarditis due to infections.

CRP:Increased levels of CRP (C-reactive protein) act as an inflammatory marker which can suggest myocarditis.

ESR:Elevated ESR (Erythrocyte Sedimentation rate) is also another marker for inflammation in the body.

Troponin levels:Increased level of troponin (circulating) in the blood can indicate damage to the heart muscle.

2. IMAGING TESTS
2. Imaging tests
Electrocardiography:Electrocardiogram is performed to detect the electrical activity of the heart.

Chest X-ray:A chest X-ray may help to check for enlargement of the heart or accumulation of fluid in the heart's sac.

Echocardiography:It uses high-pitched sound waves to produce a picture of your heart. It also helps with blood flow analysis and analysis of any valve problems, heart enlargement, and the presence of a clot within or around the heart.

Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI):A cardiac MRI uses radio waves and a magnetic field to show the size, and shape, as well as swelling, inflammation, or scarring of the heart.

3. BIOPSY
3. Biopsy
Cardiac catheterization involves threading a tiny tube into the heart to measure or biopsy for inflammation or infection.
Biopsy is not routinely performed and is suggested in special cases of:
Severe arrhythmia
Conventional supportive therapy that did not work
Suspected acute dilated cardiomyopathy (A heart condition that is caused due to blockage in the coronary arteries).


4. MICRO-RNA PROFILING
4. Micro-RNA profiling
It checks small RNA molecules in tissues or blood to understand how genes are controlled.
This test is done to detect acute and chronic myocarditis or the severity of myocardial damage.

Ensure accurate diagnosis with trusted medical tests with Tata 1mg.
Book Your Tests Today
PREVENTION OF MYOCARDITIS
Prevention Of Myocarditis

Although there is no specific preventive measure to practice, one may follow the below tips to minimize the risks of getting infected:
1. AVOID EXPOSURE TO GERMS
1. Avoid exposure to germs
Make sure to avoid people with flu-like symptoms. Similarly, if you have a viral infection, try not to expose others.


2. PRACTICE HAND HYGIENE
2. Practice hand hygiene

Practicing good hygiene, like washing hands before eating or after using the toilet, is essential.
Cleaning cuts or scrapes immediately helps prevent infections.

Keep germs at bay with proper hygiene. Explore our range of hand washes and sanitizers today!
Click Here
3. DENTAL CARE

3. Dental care
Along with brushing and flossing your teeth every day, visit the dentist regularly for timely diagnosis and treatment of any dental issues.

Oral care is often clouded by myths and misconceptions that can deter us from seeing the dentist. Discover the facts about oral health and break free from these myths!
Read This To Learn Facts
4. PRACTICE SAFE SEX

4. Practice safe sex
Safe sex practices can prevent an HIV infection which can weaken the immune system and increase your risk of developing myocarditis.

Protect yourself and your partner by practising safe sex to prevent HIV and reduce health risks.
Explore Our Range Of Condoms

5. MAINTAIN A HEALTHY WEIGHT
5. Maintain a healthy weight
Obesitycan directly increase the risk of complications due to myocarditis.
A healthy weight can go a long way in keeping the heart healthy.


6. AVOID EXPOSURE TO TICKS
6. Avoid exposure to ticks
Certain tick-borne infections, like Lyme disease, can cause myocarditis by triggering heart inflammation.
Make sure to wear long pants and cover your hands if you live in a tick-infested region. You may also use tick repellents containing DEET (N, N-Diethyl-meta-toluamide).


7. GET VACCINATED
7. Get vaccinated
Vaccination can help prevent myocarditis by reducing the risk of viral infections that may cause heart inflammation.
Make sure to get vaccinated to prevent COVID-19, influenza, rubella, measles, mumps, and poliomyelitis.

Take care of your heart! Read simple ways to prevent heart disease!
Click Here
SPECIALIST TO VISIT
Specialist To Visit

Always remember, that the symptoms of myocarditis are similar to those of a heart attack. Specialists who can help diagnose and treat myocarditis include:
General physician
Cardiologists
Cardiothoracic surgeons

Ageneral physiciancan diagnose myocarditis and provide initial treatment, including symptom management and refer to a specialist.

Acardiologistspecializes in advanced diagnostics, medical management, and monitoring of myocarditis-related heart issues.

Acardiothoracic surgeonhandles severe cases of myocarditis requiring surgical interventions.
WHEN TO SEE A DOCTOR?

When to see a doctor?
Make sure to get in touch with your doctor if you experience:

Persistent chest pain
Shortness of breath, especially at rest or during mild activity
Unexplained fatigue
Rapid or irregular heartbeats
Fainting or dizziness

Don’t ignore the signs, consult India’s best doctors for the right diagnosis and timely treatment.
Book Appointment Now
TREATMENT OF MYOCARDITIS
Treatment Of Myocarditis

Treatment options for myocarditis vary based on the underlying cause and the severity of the condition. The following approaches are commonly used to manage myocarditis:

1. ANTIBIOTICS
1. Antibiotics
If myocarditis is due to an underlying cause, like a bacterial infection, the doctor may prescribe antibiotics. Some commonly used drugs are:AmoxycillinDoxycycline


2. CORTICOSTEROIDS
2. Corticosteroids
Autoimmune conditions like lupus can cause myocarditis, and in such cases, doctors may prescribe corticosteroids to reduce the immune response, such as:CiclosporinPrednisolone


3. MEDICATIONS FOR HEART FAILURE
3. Medications for heart failure
The doctor is likely to prescribe diuretics, beta-blockers, and ACE (angiotensin-converting enzyme)-inhibitors to minimize edema and the workload on the heart. These may include the following:Enalapril(ACE inhibitor)Lisinopril(ACE inhibitor)Metoprolol succinate(Beta-blocker)Furosemide(Diuretic)Captopril(ACE inhibitor)Ramipril(ACE inhibitor)Carvedilol(Beta-blocker)


4. ANTIVIRAL DRUGS
4. Antiviral drugs
Antiviral therapy withribavirinor interferons in viral myocarditis can help reduce the severity of the disease, and decrease mortality.

Trust your health with Tata 1mg – where quality meets reliability. Shop now for genuine medicines.
Buy Them Here

If the symptoms are severe and medications are not working the way they should, more proactive treatment options might be tried. These include the following:

IVIG (Intravenous immunoglobulin):is a treatment that helps control inflammation and immune responses by providing antibodies.

VAD (Ventricular assist device):It is a mechanical device that is used to pump an adequate amount of blood from the ventricles (lower chambers) of the heart to the other parts of the body.

Intra-aortic balloon pump:Also known as IABP, it is a therapeutic device that allows the heart to pump more blood and reduce its load.

Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO):ECMO is a respiratory or cardiac support machine that allows the lungs and heart to function normally.

Heart transplant:In case of severe conditions and if the other myocarditis treatment did not work, the doctor is likely to suggest heart transplantation surgery.

HOME-CARE FOR MYOCARDITIS
Home-care For Myocarditis

Some herbal remedies have shown good results in managing cardiac care. However, it is important to take doctor's advise before starting anything

1. Astragalus:Also known as astragalus membranaceus is a type of flowering plant that has been used for centuries in traditional Chinese Medicine It can support heart health by reducing inflammation and improving circulation.

How to use it?
Brew as tea, take as a supplement or use in soups for heart health benefits.

2. Red sage:Also known as danshen, it is a traditional Chinese medicine made from the dried root of the red sage plant. It can enhance blood flow and protect heart muscles.

How to use it?
Consume as a decoction, capsule,to improve circulation.

3. Ginseng:It is a supplement that has traditionally been used to help boost the immune system . Studies suggest that it can also improve cardiac function.

How to use it?
Take as tea, capsules, or extracts to boost immunity and support heart function.

4. Sophora root:It is a well-known traditional Chinese Mongolian herbal medicine that has been utilized in clinical practice. It can help reduce inflammation and support cardiovascular health.
How to use it?
Use in herbal decoctions or supplements to reduce inflammation and support the heart.

Ginseng has other health benefits too!
Click Here To Know More

COMPLICATIONS OF MYOCARDITIS
Complications Of Myocarditis

Timely treatment of myocarditis has a good prognosis without having any long-term complications. However, severe cases may have some permanent complications related to heart muscles. These include the following:

Heart failure:Myocarditis, if left untreated, is likely to damage the heart muscles, making it inefficient to work properly. It may also lead to heart failure.

Strokeorheart attack:If the heart is unable to pump an adequate amount of blood, there is a risk of blood clot formation in the heart. If a blood clot creates a blockage in an artery of the heart, one may suffer a heart attack. Also, if the clot travels to the brain it can cause a stroke.

Arrhythmia:When the heart muscles are injured or become weak, it may lead to arrhythmia or irregular heart rhythm.

Ventricular dysrhythmias:These are abnormal heart rhythms that make the lower chambers of the heart twitch instead of pump. This can limit or stop the heart from supplying blood to the body.

Left ventricular aneurysm:It forms when a section of the heart muscle in the left ventricle (the chamber of the heart that pumps blood to the body) stretches and becomes very thin.

Dilated cardiomyopathy:It is a type of heart muscle disease that causes the heart chambers (ventricles) to thin and stretch, growing larger.

Cardiogenic shock:This is a life-threatening condition in which your heart suddenly can't pump enough blood to meet the body's needs.

Sudden cardiac death or SCD:It is a life-threatening complication in which the heart may stop beating due to severe arrhythmia.

Did you know?
Myocarditis is linked to a higher risk of sudden cardiac death (SCD) in young people, accounting for 1% to 14% of cases. Understand the causes of sudden cardiac arrest.Read This
ALTERNATIVE TREATMENT FOR MYOCARDITIS
Alternative Treatment For Myocarditis

Alternative therapies can complement medical treatment in managing symptoms. The following may help with myocarditis and its contributing factors:
1.YOGA
1.Yoga
Yoga can improve circulation, reduce inflammation, and enhance heart function, benefiting those with myocarditis. Gentle poses can also help lowerstressand support overall cardiovascular health.

Want to find out how yoga can keep your heart healthy?Read This
2. MEDITATION

2. Meditation
Meditation can calm the nervous system, reducing stress-related heart strain and inflammation.
Regular practice can help stabilize heart rhythms and promote healing.

Meditation can do wonders for your body and soul.
Read More
3. BREATHING EXERCISES

3. Breathing exercises
Deep breathing can lower blood pressure, enhance oxygen flow, and reduce heart strain.
It can also activate the relaxation response, supporting heart recovery and overall well-being.

Read more about deep breathing exercises.
Click Here
LIVING WITH MYOCARDITIS
Living With Myocarditis

Myocarditis can sometimes show no symptoms and may resolve on its own, with many individuals living a normal lifespan. While some may need medications or surgery, a healthy lifestyle and alternative therapies can support heart health.

Here are some home care tips for managing myocarditis effectively:

1. TAKE ADEQUATE REST
1. Take adequate rest
Rest and reducing the strain on the heart is an important part of myocarditis recovery.
If you have or had myocarditis, ask your doctor which type and amount of physical activity are safe for you.


2. EAT A HEART-FRIENDLY DIET
2. Eat a heart-friendly diet
Foods that are good for your heart include green leafy vegetables, fruits, nuts, whole grains & low-fat dairy products.
Try to limit the consumption of trans fat, salt, saturated fats, cholesterol, red meat, and sugary foods.


Want to learn which foods can keep your heart strong and healthy?
Click Here

3. REDUCE ALCOHOL INTAKE
3. Reduce alcohol intake
Drinking excessive alcohol can increase the levels of certain fats known as triglycerides in the blood and might harm the immune system and the heart.
Thus, it is important to keep alcohol intake to a minimum.

4. QUIT SMOKING
4. Quit smoking
Smoking is known to increase heart rate and blood pressure, so it is important to quit smoking in order to improve the symptoms of myocarditis.

Explore our smoking cessation range that can help you quit smoking.
Quit Today

5. STAY PHYSICALLY ACTIVE
5. Stay physically active
Supervised moderate exercise is an integral part of a healthy heart regimen.
Consult your doctor to understand the range of physical activities you can do.

Your heart health is the key to overall good health. Read tips from cardiologists to keep your heart healthy.
Tap HereDid our information help you?In our relentless endeavour to keep improving our services, you are our eyes. Kindly take out sometime to guide us on how to serve your better.Share your feedbackSubscribe to stay informedSubscribe to our carefully crafted informative emailers by Medical Experts and be the first to get the latest health news, tips and important updates.SubmitDisclaimerTata 1mg's sole intention is to ensure that its consumers get information that is expert-reviewed, accurate and trustworthy. However, the information contained herein should NOT be used as a substitute for the advice of a qualified physician. The information provided here is for informational purposes only. This may not cover all possible side effects, drug interactions or warnings or alerts. Please consult your doctor and discuss all your queries related to any disease or medicine. We intend to support, not replace, the doctor-patient relationship.

--- REFERENCES ---

- Myocarditis Foundation. Understanding myocarditis [Internet]. Myocarditis Foundation. Myocarditis Foundation; 2021 [cited 2021Nov3].  (https://www.myocarditisfoundation.org/about-myocarditis/ )
- Myocarditis [Internet]. NORD (National Organization for Rare Disorders). 2015 [cited 2021Nov3].  (https://rarediseases.org/rare-diseases/myocarditis/)
- Ali et al. COVID-19 and myocarditis: a review of literature. The Egyptian Heart Journal (2022) 74:23.  (https://tehj.springeropen.com/track/pdf/10.1186/s43044-022-00260-2.pdf )
- Lynge TH, Nielsen TS, Gregers Winkel B, Tfelt-Hansen J, Banner J. Sudden cardiac death caused by myocarditis in persons aged 1-49 years: A nationwide study of 14294 deaths in Denmark [Internet]. Forensic sciences research. Taylor & Francis; 2019 [cited 2021Nov3].  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6713107/ )
- Gabriel Fung, Honglin Luo, et al. Myocarditis. Circulation Research February 5, 2016.  (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1161/circresaha.115.306573 )
- Peretto G, Sala S, Rizzo S, et al. Arrhythmias in myocarditis: State of the art. Heart Rhythm. 2019;16(5):793-801.  (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30476544/ )
- Heart inflammation [Internet]. National Heart Lung and Blood Institute. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; [cited 2021Nov3].  (https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health-topics/heart-inflammation )
- Al-Akchar M. Acute myocarditis [Internet]. StatPearls [Internet]. U.S. National Library of Medicine; 2021 [cited 2021Nov3].  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK441847/ )
- Fadoua Mouedder et al. Rheumatoid arthritis, a rare cause of acute myocarditis: a case report. PAMJ Clinical Medicine. 2020;4(115).  (https://www.clinical-medicine.panafrican-med-journal.com/content/article/4/115/pdf/115.pdf )
- Schultz JC, Hilliard AA, Cooper LT, Rihal CS. Diagnosis and treatment of viral myocarditis [Internet]. Mayo Clinic proceedings. Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research; 2009 [cited 2021Nov3].  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2770911/)
- Oktay AA, Aktürk HK, Paul TK, et al. Diabetes, Cardiomyopathy, and Heart Failure. [Updated 2020 Aug 1]. In: Feingold KR, Anawalt B, Boyce A, et al., editors. Endotext [Internet]. South Dartmouth (MA): MDText.com, Inc.; 2000.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK560257/ )
- Golpour, A.; Patriki, D.; Hanson, P.J.; McManus, B.; Heidecker, B. Epidemiological Impact of Myocarditis. J. Clin. Med. 2021, 10.  (https://www.researchgate.net/publication/349122691_Epidemiological_Impact_of_Myocarditis)
- Barbaro G. HIV-associated cardiomyopathy etiopathogenesis and clinical aspects. Herz. 2005;30(6):486-492.  (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16170679/ )
- Kang M, An J. Viral Myocarditis. [Updated 2022 Jan 5]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2022 Jan.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK459259/ )
- Tschöpe C, Carsten Tschöpe From the Charité, Cooper LT, Leslie T. Cooper Correspondence to Leslie T. Cooper, Torre-Amione G, Guillermo Torre-Amione Methodist DeBakey Heart and Vascular Center, et al. Management of myocarditis-related cardiomyopathy in adults [Internet]. Circulation Research. 2019 [cited 2021Nov3].  (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.118.313578 )
- XM; LJPYMD. Herbal medicines for viral myocarditis [Internet]. The Cochrane database of systematic reviews. U.S. National Library of Medicine; [cited 2021Nov3].  (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15266498/ )
- Giant cell myocarditis [Internet]. NORD (National Organization for Rare Disorders). 2018 [cited 2021Nov3].  (https://rarediseases.org/rare-diseases/giant-cell-myocarditis/ )
- Barbiellini Amidei C, Fayosse A, Dumurgier J, Machado-Fragua MD, Tabak AG, van Sloten T, et al. Association between age at diabetes onset and subsequent risk of dementia [Internet]. JAMA. American Medical Association; 2021 [cited 2021Nov3].  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8080220 )
- Al-Akchar M, Kiel J. Acute Myocarditis. [Updated 2022 May 8]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2022 Jan.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK441847/ )
- rown RP, Gerbarg PL. Yoga breathing, meditation, and longevity. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2009;1172:54-62. Available from:  (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19735239/ )
- Bentley TGK, D'Andrea-Penna G, Rakic M, Arce N, LaFaille M, Berman R, Cooley K, Sprimont P. Breathing Practices for Stress and Anxiety Reduction: Conceptual Framework of Implementation Guidelines Based on a Systematic Review of the Published Literature. Brain Sci. 2023 Nov 21;13(12):1612. Available from:  (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10741869/ )
