https://www.1mg.com/diseases/nutritional-deficiencies-323#

NUTRITIONAL DEFICIENCIES
Nutritional deficienciesAlso known as Malnutrition and Nutrient deficiencies
OVERVIEW
Overview

A balanced diet consists of various macronutrients and micronutrients. Macronutrients include carbohydrates, proteins, and fats. Vitamins and minerals comprise the micronutrient portion of the meal. Nutritional deficiency is a broad term used to describe reduced levels of any nutrient than that required to meet bodily needs.

Nutritional deficiencies can manifest in many ways depending on which nutrient is deficient. Common symptoms may include weight loss, hair loss, poor growth, swollen belly, higher susceptibility to infections, reduced wound healing, fatigue, weakness.

Various risk factors that can increase the likelihood of nutritional deficiencies include poor intake of fresh fruits and vegetables, restrictive diets, smoking, pregnancy along with some medical conditions such as Crohn’s disease, inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), and eating disorders.

Eating a well balanced and wholesome diet is the best way to prevent nutritional deficiencies. Treatment options include a diet rich in the deficient nutrient along with dietary supplements.
KEY FACTS
Key FactsUsually seen inChildren under the age of 5 years and adults above the age of 60 years.Gender affectedBoth men and women but more common in womenNecessary health tests/imagingMedical history and physical examinationBlood tests:Protein total, Serum retinol (for Vitamin A),Vitamin B12,Vitamin C,Vitamin E, Vitamin K,Vitamin D,Calcium,Zinc,Iron,Magnesium,Selenium,Potassium,Electrolyte evaluation,Complete blood countImaging tests:Bone X-rays,Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), Endoscopy & DermoscopyTreatmentCorrecting the deficiency:SupplementationTreatment of associated symptoms:Transfusion, Vitrectomy & Bone surgerySpecialists to consultGeneral physicianInternal medicine specialistGastroenterologistNutritionistPediatrician
SYMPTOMS OF NUTRITIONAL DEFICIENCIES
Symptoms Of Nutritional Deficiencies

Nutrients are the principal source of energy. They are also involved in several bodily functions like healing and repairing wounds, normal vision, growth and development of bones, keeping nerve cells healthy amongst other functions.

In most of the cases, symptoms start to develop 8 to 12 weeks after inadequate intake of nutrients. In some cases, symptoms are difficult to be noticed because symptoms may not occur for several months or years.

Symptoms can be non-specific, often resembling other medical conditions. Therefore, it is necessary to conduct a medical examination for confirmation. Some generic signs and symptoms may include:Loss of appetiteWeight lossMuscle wastingBody fat wastingPoor growth of bonesSwollen bellyHigher susceptibility to infectionsReduced wound healingTirednessMuscle crampsGrowth retardationHair lossDryness in the lips, skin, and nailsReduced sensitivity to lightVision lossDry eyesLoss of teeth
CAUSES OF NUTRITIONAL DEFICIENCIES
Causes Of Nutritional Deficiencies

Nutritional deficiencies can develop due to the following reasons:
1. POOR QUALITY OR QUANTITY OF FOOD CONSUMED
1. Poor quality or quantity of food consumed
Every nutrient has a recommended dietary allowance (RDA) that refers to the amount in which the nutrient has to be taken to meet the body.

The continuous consumption of reduced nutritional quantity can lead to nutritional deficiency.

What should your kids eat?
Find Out
2. INCREASED DIETARY REQUIREMENTS

2. Increased dietary requirements
The presence of several conditions increases the amount of RDA of certain nutrients. It can cause nutritional deficiencies, if the supply is not increased.
Pregnancy
Breastfeeding
Cancer
3. DECREASED GASTROINTESTINAL DIGESTION AND ABSORPTION

3. Decreased gastrointestinal digestion and absorption
Every nutrient has to be absorbed into the bloodstream to produce its action. Individuals taking a balanced diet having all the nutrients within RDA can also suffer from nutritional deficiencies. This can happen in case of decreased absorption.
4. INCREASED EXCRETION
4. Increased excretion
Increased excretion of nutrients in some conditions like kidney diseases can also lead to nutritional deficiencies.
TYPES OF NUTRITIONAL DEFICIENCIES
Types Of Nutritional Deficiencies

Nutritional deficiencies can be of following types:
1. MACRONUTRIENT DEFICIENCY
1. Macronutrient deficiency
Macronutrients are required in larger quantities. They basically provide energy and help in building muscle mass. The common examples are fat, protein and carbohydrate. The deficiencies are discussed as follows:

Protein-energy malnutrition:It is a condition that is developed as a result of low dietary intake of protein.
As per some studies, around one-third of the children suffer from protein deprivation. Marasmus and Kwashiorkor are the two most clinical outcomes of protein deprivation that are seen in children.

Here are signs that show you are not taking enough protein in your diet.
Tap to Read

Carbohydrate deficiency:The body requires a continuous supply of energy/glucose. Gross carbohydrate deficiency can lead to dip in energy levels along with negatively affecting various physiological functions of the body.

Fats/Essential fatty acids deficiency:Essential fatty acids (EFA) are the fats that can not be produced by the body. There are two families of EFA, omega-3 and omega-6. They help regulate cholesterol and also play important functional roles in sustaining nerve impulse transmission, memory storage, and tissue structure.

The reduced dietary intake is associated with diminished growth in infants and children. The other clinical signs of this deficiency include a dry scaly rash, increased susceptibility to infection, and poor wound healing.

Explore our widest range of fatty acids supplements.
Shop Now


2. MICRONUTRIENT DEFICIENCY
2. Micronutrient deficiency
Vitamin and mineral are the micronutrients. They are required in very small amounts. Their deficiencies are usually associated with chronic disorders.
The several commonly observed micronutrient deficiencies include:
Vitamin deficiencies:The common deficiencies of this category includeVitamin A,Vitamin B 12,Vitamin C,Vitamin D, Vitamin E, and Vitamin K deficiency.


Calcium deficiency:The total serum calcium levels below 8.8 mg/dL is considered as calcium deficiency. The primary symptoms include rough hair, brittle nails, dry skin, itching, cataracts (clouding of eye lens), and poor quality of teeth.


Zinc deficiency:Zinc deficiency refers to the low levels of zinc (less than 0.66 to 1.10 mcg/ml) in the body. People with zinc deficiency may experience skin rashes, hair loss, diarrhea, frequent cold and infections, and weight loss after months of having low levels of zinc.


Iron deficiency:It is the most prevalent deficiency that is usually seen in young children and premenopausal women. As iron is the main contributor of hemoglobin, its deficiency leads toiron deficiency anemia.


Iodine deficiency:Iodine deficiency is observed when the body stores of iodine starts to deplete to 10-20 micrograms. Its deficiency is associatedwith hypothyroidismwhich can further even lead togoiter.


Magnesium deficiency:It refers to the low levels of magnesium (less than 1.7 mg/dl) in the body. It is linked withcolorectal cancer,osteoporosis,hypertension, anddiabetes.


Selenium deficiency:80-120 μg/l of selenium is regarded as deficiency as it is a trace mineral. It is known to affect the production of sperms and thyroid function. The deficiency is linked with cardiovascular diseases and mood swings.


Potassium deficiency:The deficiency of potassium is rarely observed and is usually seen as a result of medications or sustained vomiting or diarrhea.


Fluoride deficiency:Fluoride is required for the normal growth and development of teeth and bones. Its deficiency is associated with tooth decay and improper bone growth.Did you know?Nutrient deficiencies mostly affect children under 5 years of age. Here are some expert tips that help prevent nutritional deficiency in your child.Click to Know
RISK FACTORS FOR NUTRITIONAL DEFICIENCIES
Risk Factors For Nutritional Deficiencies

The following factors increases the risk of nutritional deficiencies:
1. GASTROINTESTINAL DISORDERS
1. Gastrointestinal disorders
Individuals with certain medical conditions especially of the digestive system are more susceptible to nutritional deficiencies. This is due to the impaired absorption of the nutrients. Such conditions include:
Celiac disease
Inflammatory bowel disease
Anorexia nervosa
Swallowing inability
Persistent vomiting
Lactose intolerance


Here are 7 healthy food substitutes for people with lactose intolerance.
Click to Know
2. IMBALANCED, RESTRICTIVE, OR LOW-NUTRIENTS DIETS

2. Imbalanced, restrictive, or low-nutrients diets

We are what we eat. Restrictive diets can increase the risk of nutritional deficiencies. Strict vegan and plant based diets have also shown a poor absorption of micronutrients such as zinc and iron, leading to their deficiency.
3. CERTAIN MEDICATIONS

3. Certain Medications
The use of certain medication could also increase the risk of specific nutrient deficiencies. This can be attributed by reducing its absorption or increasing its excretion. The class of medications that can cause nutritional deficiencies are:
Antacids
Antihistamines
Anticancer
Anticoagulants

4. PREGNANCY AND LACTATION
4. Pregnancy and lactation
Pregnant and lactating women increase the risk of nutritional deficiencies due to increase in demand. More than 40% of children and pregnant women suffer from anemia as a result of nutritional deficiencies like that of iron.

5. AGE
5. Age
Children and older people are prone to nutritional deficiencies due to increased nutritional requirements or association with age related health conditions.

Looking for some nutritional supplements for your kids?
Add To Cart
6. CHRONIC ALCOHOLISM

6. Chronic alcoholism
The chronic alcoholism is associated with a lower level of have all been associated with chronic alcoholism. Alcohol intake is also associated with low serum magnesium, selenium and zinc levels.

7. OBESITY
7. Obesity
Obese individuals have a higher incidence of micronutrient deficiency. The prevalence of Vitamin D deficiency in obese individuals ranges from 80–90%.

Explore our exclusive range of weight management supplements.
Shop Now

DIAGNOSIS OF NUTRITIONAL DEFICIENCIES
Diagnosis Of Nutritional Deficiencies

1. MEDICAL HISTORY AND PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
1. Medical history and physical examination
Your doctor will ask you about your symptoms, medical history, and any relevant factors such as your diet and lifestyle. They will also perform a physical examination to check for signs associated with deficiency.
2. BLOOD TESTS

2. Blood tests
Depending upon the symptoms, any one or the combination of these blood tests are recommended. These tests assess the quantity of the mentioned nutrient in the blood.Protein totalSerum retinol (for Vitamin A)Vitamin B12Vitamin CVitamin EVitamin KVitamin DCalciumZincIronMagnesiumSeleniumPotassiumFluorideLeukocyte testElectrolyte evaluation(to evaluate overall nutritional and volume status)Complete blood count(recommended if there is a possibility of anemia or any infection)

3. IMAGING TESTS
3. Imaging tests
Bone X-rays :The radiography of bones is mostly recommended in children for the evaluation of their growth as a result of nutritional deficiencies.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI):It can be used to examine the brain and spinal cord, particularly if symptoms like numbness, tingling, or balance problems. It can help identify structural changes that might be related to vitamin deficiencies.
Endoscopy:It involves the use of a flexible tube to directly view and examine internal structures. It may be done to detect any underlying conditions which may be a cause or effect of nutritional deficiencies.
Dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) scan:This test helps in measuring bone mineral density in patients with chronic Vitamin D deficiency.
Dermoscopy:This procedure involves examination of the skin lesions in case of any nutritional deficiencies like Vitamin C affecting the skin.


Looking for a trusted lab to get your tests done? Get tested with Tata 1mg labs to offer accurate and on-time results.
Tap To Book
CELEBS AFFECTED
Celebs affectedVidya BalanBollywood celebrity, Vidya Balan had suffered from anemia as a result of iron deficiency. She talked about “dates” as an excellent source of iron through her social media handle.Gwyneth PaltrowFamous American actress and businesswoman once had Vitamin D deficiency. She managed her condition by consuming Vitamin D3 supplements and fish oil.
PREVENTION OF NUTRITIONAL DEFICIENCIES
Prevention Of Nutritional Deficiencies

The best way to prevent nutritional deficiencies is to have a balanced diet that contains an adequate amount of macronutrients and micronutrients.
1. CONSUME  A WELL-BALANCED DIET

1. Consume  a well-balanced diet

What to eat
Carbohydrates should constitute 50-60% of a meal. The most common healthy sources of carbohydrate are whole-grain, rice, cereals and legumes
10-20% should come from protein sources such as poultry, eggs, sea foods, soybeans, lean meat
Add some good source of healthy fats such as avocados, nuts, seeds, olive oil, and fatty fishes
Fresh fruits and vegetables such as guava, strawberry, papaya, kiwi, spinach, carrots, and bell peppers are a very good source of micronutrients. Eat at least one fruit a day.
A healthy gut microbiome can support the proper absorption of nutrients. Include fiber-rich foods in your diet.
Also, make sure to include probiotics in your diet. Probiotics are good bacteria that are able to synthesize B‐group vitamins.

What to avoid/limit


Healthy eating is all about balance. The nutrient-poor and calorie dense food satisfies hunger but keeps the body deprived of nutrients. Such foods should be avoided or limited. The examples include:
Highly processed and packaged foods such as chips, ketchups, chocolates, and ready to eat food items
Sweetened drinks such as soda, soft drinks, flavored milks, sports drinks, flavored water with sugar, and pre packaged juices
Processed meats such as sausages, and hot dogs

Listen to our experts discuss on how you can get complete nutrition from healthy eating habits.

2. TREAT ANY UNDERLYING MEDICAL CONDITIONS

2. Treat any underlying medical conditions
People with underlying health conditions such as celiac disease and cystic fibrosis affect the absorption of nutrients. Therefore treating the underlying condition may help in maintaining the optimum level of nutrients.

3. AVOID RESTRICTIVE DIETS
3. Avoid restrictive diets
Fad diets generally lead to nutrient deprivation. Avoiding restrictive diets may help prevent most nutritional deficiency.
4. DO NOT SHY AWAY FROM THE SUN

4. Do not shy away from the sun
Approximately 5–30 minutes of sun exposure daily to the face, arms, hands, and legs without sunscreen leads to sufficient Vitamin D synthesis and optimizes many bodily functions.
5. ENCOURAGE BREASTFEEDING OF INFANTS

5. Encourage breastfeeding of infants
Breast milk serves as an excellent source of nutrients such as Vitamin A and proteins, especially during the initial six months of life.

It is seen that children who get exclusively breast milk for the first 6 months have lesser chances of developing Vitamin A deficiency later in life. They are also less likely to suffer from protein deficiencies.
6. MAINTAIN ENVIRONMENTAL SANITATION

6. Maintain environmental sanitation
The chances of some nutritional deficiencies increase in the presence of certain diseases such as respiratory tract infections,tuberculosis, diarrhea, and worm infestations. Proper sanitation of the living environment helps in reducing the prevalence of these diseases.

Here are 5 simple tips to maintain hygiene at the workplace.
Read Now
7. ENSURE PROPER VACCINATION

7. Ensure proper vaccination
Certain vaccine-preventable diseases such as measles serve as a precipitating factor for deficiencies like those of Vitamin A. Immunization helps in the elimination of such factors and may help in preventing this deficiency.Did you know?
Adults also need vaccination just like kids. Here is a complete guide on the types of adult vaccines, why you need adult vaccines, and when you should get them.Tap to Know
SPECIALIST TO VISIT
Specialist To Visit

Doctors that can help you diagnose and treat nutritional deficiencies include:General physicianInternal medicine specialistGastroenterologistNutritionistPediatrician (in case of children)

A general physician will examine your symptoms and initiate treatment.

In case of severe cases, they may refer you to an Internal Medicine specialist who provides comprehensive care for adult patients, managing complex cases and addressing underlying health conditions.

Gastroenterologists can also be consulted to treat the cases where nutritional deficiency is developed as a result of malabsorption.

Nutritionists can help in optimizing the diet that helps in fulfilling the deficiencies.

You can consult a pediatrician in case of children.

Seek guidance from our trusted team of doctors.
Consult Now
TREATMENT OF NUTRITIONAL DEFICIENCIES
Treatment Of Nutritional Deficiencies

The primary treatment approach is to correct the deficiency through the diet. The treatment usually depends upon the duration and severity of symptoms.

Supplements that are usually taken orally are given.  Intravenous supplements are given in case of serious symptoms. The treatment options include:


1. CORRECTING THE DEFICIENCY
1. Correcting the deficiency
The deficiency is corrected through supplementation. The common ones are:Vitamin AVitamin CVitamin B12, B9, and B6Vitamin DVitamin EVitamin KCalciumZincIronIodineMagnesiumSeleniumPotassiumFluoride


Looking for vitamin supplements. Shop by category.
Order Now
3. TREATMENT OF ASSOCIATED SYMPTOMS

3. Treatment of associated symptoms
Prolonged nutritional deficiencies may require other treatment options like:
Transfusion:The severe deficiency of Vitamin C, Vitamin B12, and iron can also cause anemia. Such people may require blood transfusion.
Vitrectomy:It is performed in individuals having severe eye problems such as dry eyes as a result of prolonged Vitamin C deficiency.  During the surgery, vitreous  fluid (a gel-like substance that fills the space within the eye) is replaced with another solution.
Bone surgery:The excessive deficiency of calcium and Vitamin D for a long period of time can cause bone disease. Such children may require surgery, if symptoms do not resolve with supplements.
HOME-CARE FOR NUTRITIONAL DEFICIENCIES
Home-care For Nutritional Deficiencies

Indian kitchens are loaded with superfoods that possess a vast nutritional density. Try to include these in the diet. These include:

Mushrooms:Mushrooms possess a very impressive range of nutrients. It is a rich source of Vitamin D. It also contains Vitamin B complexes, proteins and minerals such as selenium, potassium, phosphorus and iron together along with dietary fiber.

Pistachios (pista):Pistachios contain proteins, carbohydrates, dietary fiber, healthy fats, minerals like iron, potassium, phosphorus, magnesium, copper, manganese and zinc. It is a storehouse of Vitamins like A, C, E, K, B-complex Vitamins.

Raisins (kishmish):The nutritional profile of raisins is rather enviable considering they essentially contain no fats. They have a healthy dose of calories, carbohydrates and even some amount of proteins. The nutrients found in raisins consist of iron, potassium, magnesium, copper, zinc, phosphorus and calcium, Vitamin B along with small quantities of folate, Vitamin C and Vitamin K.

Apple:Apples are endowed with a very impressive nutritional profile. Enriched with all the major kinds of Vitamins such as Vitamin A, B1, B2, B3, B5, B6, B9, C, E, K, it also houses essential minerals like potassium, phosphorus, magnesium, calcium, and iron.

Quinoa:Quinoa has emerged as a super grain over the last couple of years. It is a protein-packed grain containing every amino acid. It is also a rich source of calcium, iron, manganese, magnesium, and calcium. It is also rich in Vitamins B1, B3, B6 and E.

Indian food is most popular for its diversity. Listen to our expert discuss how you can maximize your nutrition from traditional Indian diet.
Click to watch

COMPLICATIONS OF NUTRITIONAL DEFICIENCIES
Complications Of Nutritional Deficiencies

The prolonged nutritional deficiencies can lead to several compilation such as:OsteoporosisCardiovascular diseaseLow immunityCognitive defectsGoiterMental retardationAcute respiratory infectionsLoss of visionRicketsPellagraBeriberiDiarrhea
LIVING WITH NUTRITIONAL DEFICIENCIES
Living With Nutritional Deficiencies


Nutritional deficiencies mostly resolve with conscious eating and dietary supplements. The following measures might help in faster recovery:
1. GET DIAGNOSED
1. Get diagnosed
Visit a healthcare professional to confirm the deficiency and determine the severity. They may recommend further tests to identify the underlying cause of the deficiency.
2. EDUCATE YOURSELF

2. Educate yourself
Learn about the deficiency, its causes, symptoms, and management options. This knowledge   will empower you to make informed decisions about your health and work effectively with your healthcare professional.
3. DO NOT SELF MEDICATE

3. Do not self medicate
It is advised to consult health care professionals before starting supplements. The doctor will prescribe the right dose as per your need. Nutrients can interact with other medications which a doctor may help you to find and fix.
4. BE AWARE OF TOXICITY

4. Be aware of toxicity
Consuming a large amount of supplements over a short period of time can cause toxicity. The total intake, from combined dietary and supplemental sources, should not exceed as per the recommended amount.

Some common signs and symptoms of toxicity include:ConstipationNauseaVomitingIncreased urinationConfusionIrregular heart rhythmKidney damage
5. AVOID OVERCOOKING

5. Avoid overcooking
It is advised to eat fruits and vegetables raw or very lightly cooked for the maximum effect. It is because some vitamins and minerals are sensitive to heat and overcooking can degrade it.
6. ABSTAIN FROM SMOKING

6. Abstain from smoking
Smoking serves as a trigger for some nutritional deficiencies such as Vitamin C. It is advised to completely avoid smoking or to limit it. Individuals who smoke may require higher amounts of supplements.

Want to quit smoking? Explore our range of smoking cessation products.
Order Now
7. KEEP YOURSELF HYDRATED

7. Keep yourself hydrated
Some supplements may increase urination. Make sure to keep yourself hydrated to compensate for the water loss.
8. GO FOR REGULAR CHECK-UPS

8. Go for regular check-ups
Schedule regular appointments with your doctor to monitor your nutrient levels and overall health. They can guide you on necessary adjustments to your treatment plan.Did our information help you?In our relentless endeavour to keep improving our services, you are our eyes. Kindly take out sometime to guide us on how to serve your better.Share your feedbackSubscribe to stay informedSubscribe to our carefully crafted informative emailers by Medical Experts and be the first to get the latest health news, tips and important updates.SubmitDisclaimerTata 1mg's sole intention is to ensure that its consumers get information that is expert-reviewed, accurate and trustworthy. However, the information contained herein should NOT be used as a substitute for the advice of a qualified physician. The information provided here is for informational purposes only. This may not cover all possible side effects, drug interactions or warnings or alerts. Please consult your doctor and discuss all your queries related to any disease or medicine. We intend to support, not replace, the doctor-patient relationship.

--- REFERENCES ---

- Kiani AK, Dhuli K, Donato K, Aquilanti B, Velluti V, Matera G, Iaconelli A, Connelly ST, Bellinato F, Gisondi P, Bertelli M. Main nutritional deficiencies. J Prev Med Hyg. 2022 Oct 17;63(2 Suppl 3):E93-E101. doi: 10.15167/2421-4248/jpmh2022.63.2S3.2752. PMID: 36479498; PMCID: PMC9710417.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9710417/)
- Nutrient deficiency, Britanicca, Last Updated On: November 20, 2023.  (https://www.britannica.com/science/nutritional-disease#ref247847)
- Via M. The malnutrition of obesity: micronutrient deficiencies that promote diabetes. ISRN Endocrinol. 2012;2012:103472. doi: 10.5402/2012/103472. Epub 2012 Mar 15. PMID: 22462011; PMCID: PMC3313629.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3313629/)
- Micronutrients, World Health Organization.  (https://www.who.int/health-topics/micronutrients#tab=tab_1)
- Neufingerl N, Eilander A. Nutrient Intake and Status in Adults Consuming Plant-Based Diets Compared to Meat-Eaters: A Systematic Review. Nutrients. 2021 Dec 23;14(1):29. doi: 10.3390/nu14010029. PMID: 35010904; PMCID: PMC8746448.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8746448/)
- Prescott JD, Drake VJ, Stevens JF. Medications and Micronutrients: Identifying Clinically Relevant Interactions and Addressing Nutritional Needs. J Pharm Technol. 2018 Oct;34(5):216-230. doi: 10.1177/8755122518780742. Epub 2018 June 20. PMID: 34860982; PMCID: PMC6109862.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6109862/)
