https://www.1mg.com/diseases/osteoporosis-578#

OSTEOPOROSIS
OsteoporosisAlso known as Silent disease of bone
OVERVIEW
Overview

Osteoporosis literally means porous bone. This condition weakens bones and increases the risk of bone fractures.

Individuals with osteoporosis do not have symptoms until bone fractures occur,  hence the name, the silent disease of bone. These spontaneous fractures can cause severe back pain, loss of height, or malformations of the spine, like kyphosis (hunched posture).

Osteoporosis is often seen in older women, usually in the menopausal age, due to decreased estrogen (a hormone responsible for female reproduction). Other significant risk factors include family history, lack of exercise, calcium and vitamin D deficiency, smoking, excessive alcohol consumption, and low body weight.

The diagnosis of osteoporosis is done by X-rays and confirmed by tests to measure bone density.

Treatment usually depends on the severity of the condition. Lifestyle modifications like strengthening exercises, Vitamin D and calcium supplements, quitting smoking, etc., are vital. Prescription medications and hormone therapy may be required in severe cases.
KEY FACTS
Key FactsUsually seen inAdults above 50 years of age.Gender affectedBoth men and women but more common in women.Body part(s) involvedHipsWristsSpinePrevalenceWorld:18.3% (2021)Mimicking ConditionsHomocystinuriaHyperparathyroidismImaging in osteomalacia and renal osteodystrophyMastocytosisMultiple myelomaPaget diseaseScurvySickle cell anemiaNecessary health tests/imagingBone mineral density (BMD)Calcium testVitamin D testTreatmentSupplements:Vitamin Dand calcium
Medications:Bisphosphonate andDenosumabHormonal therapies:Raloxifene,Calcitonin,Teriparatideto, and Testosterone therapy.Specialists to consultRheumatologistEndocrinologistOrthopedic surgeonSee All
SYMPTOMS OF OSTEOPOROSIS
Symptoms Of Osteoporosis

Osteoporosis is also called a "silent" disease" because it has no specific clinical signs and symptoms unless there is a fracture. Spine fractures can induce severe back pain, loss of height, or spine deformities such as a stooped or hunched posture, also known as kyphosis. Bones affected by osteoporosis can become so fragile that fractures occur spontaneously or for the following reasons:Minor falls generally do not cause a fracture in a healthy bone.Everyday stresses such as bending, lifting, or even coughing.

Are you suffering from bone pain?
It could be osteoporosis. Know more about the risk factors and if you fall under that category.
Read Now


TYPES OF OSTEOPOROSIS
Types Of Osteoporosis

Osteoporosis can be classified into the following categories:
1. Primary osteoporosis:It is the most common form of the disease and is often associated with age and sex hormone deficiency. This type includes:Postmenopausal osteoporosis (type I):This subtype is associated with a deficiency of estrogen (hormones responsible for normal sexual and reproductive development in women) seen in women after menopause.
Senile osteoporosis (type II):Occurs in both men and women aged above 70 yrs due to the progressively negative balance between bone formation and resorption.
2. Secondary osteoporosis:It is characterized by a low bone mass due to alterations in bone, leading to fragility fractures in the presence of an underlying disease or medication.Did You Know?Osteoporosis affects men as well. Studies show that men experience 42% of their total lifetime bone loss before age 50. Hypogonadism (when sex glands produce little or no hormones) is men's primary cause of osteoporosis.Click To Know More
CAUSES OF OSTEOPOROSIS
Causes Of Osteoporosis

Normal bone turnover involves a balance between bone resorption and bone formation processes. In postmenopausal women, the rate of bone turnover increases dramatically and remains elevated after cessation of ovarian function, leading to continuous bone loss.


Bones are strongest in early adulthood, and you slowly start losing bone from around the age of 35 years. This is a common phenomenon and happens to everyone. However, certain risk factors may increase the risk of the development of osteoporosis or can increase the likelihood that you will develop the disease.
RISK FACTORS FOR OSTEOPOROSIS
Risk Factors For Osteoporosis

Osteoporosis is a multifactorial disease, where no single factor can completely account for its occurrence. The most common risk factors include:
NON-MODIFIABLE RISK FACTORS
Non-modifiable risk factors
Family history:Studieshave shown that family history is a significant risk factor for fracture, along with low bone density.
Race:Osteoporosis is a chronic health condition affecting primarily white women.
Advanced age:Researchhas shown that age is a high-risk factor for osteoporosis, asVitamin Dinsufficiency and reduced calcium absorption are common in the elderly.
Female sex:Studiessuggest osteoporosis is commonly encountered in older women with no underlying risk factors. Women tend to have a younger onset of bone loss compared with men.
Amenorrhea:It is the absence of menstruation. This happens to die to low estrogen levels, which can cause osteoporosis.
Early menopause:Menopause in less than45 yearsof age, surgical removal of both ovaries, and prolonged perimenopausal absence of periods can lead to osteoporosis.
Hormone-related disorders:Diseases that can trigger osteoporosis due to overproduction or underproduction of certain hormones include:
Overactive thyroid gland
Reduced amounts of sex hormones (estrogen and testosterone)
Disorders of the pituitary gland
Overactivity of the parathyroid glands (hyperparathyroidism).
Primary and secondary hypogonadism (when sex glands produce little or no hormones) in men.
Diabetes:It can increase bone cell destruction and decrease bone formation, leading to accelerated bone loss.


Do not let diabetes slow you down. Be ahead of your symptoms with our widest range of diabetes care products.
Browse Now
Malabsorption:This can be due to problems, as in Coeliac disease (an autoimmune disease in which the immune system attacks your tissues when you eat gluten) and Crohn's disease (an inflammatory bowel disease that causes swelling of your digestive tract).
Chronic kidney disease:Studiessuggest that chronic kidney disease (CKD) is associated with the development of osteoporosis and fragility fractures.
Blood disorders:Studiesshow that hematological diseases like thalassemia (when the body doesn't make enough of a protein called hemoglobin) and pernicious anemia (a decreased production of red blood cells due to lack of vitamin B12) represent a frequent cause of secondary osteoporosis.
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA):It is an inflammatory disease associated with osteoporosis due to active inflammation and glucocorticoids.
Dementia:It is a group of symptoms affecting memory, thinking, and social abilities. Dementia can lead the patients to have decreased activity levels and lower sunlight exposure, predisposing them to osteoporosis.
Depression:Researchshows that depression is a risk factor for low bone mineral density (BMD) and fractures. This has been shown in middle-aged women and elderly subjects of both genders.
Cancer:Bone metastases (spread of cancer) are a common consequence of cancer, leading to decreased bone density and pathologic fractures.

Did you know?
Walking can improve the quality of life of individuals who have cancer.
Know More
Long-term bed rest:Studieshave concluded that bone loss is more evident in elderly patients advised with prolonged bed rest.
Spaceflight:Astronauts who travel in outer space tend to lose bone mass density due to microgravity, which can lead to osteoporosis.
MODIFIABLE RISK FACTORS
Modifiable risk factors
Smoking:Studieshave shown a direct relationship between tobacco use and decreased bone density and hence, as a risk factor for osteoporosis and bone fracture.

Get rid of this deadly habit with our smoking cessation range.
Try Now
Low BMI:Body mass index (BMI) estimates body fat based on height and weight. A low BMI is an important and modifiable risk factor for osteoporosis and osteoporotic fracture development.
Inadequate physical activity:This is because a sedentary lifestyle encourages the loss of bone mass, leading to osteoporosis.
Low dietary calcium intake:Osteoporosis is more likely to occur in people with low calcium intake, and a lifelong lack of calcium plays a role in the development of osteoporosis.

Do not let low calcium in your diet make your bones weak!Learn about various rich sources of calcium.
Click Here
Vitamin D deficiency:Vitamin D plays a crucial role in the absorption of calcium and phosphorus from the food you eat, and a lack can lead to osteoporosis.

Why let Vitamin D deficiency stop you from leading a quality life?
Explore Vitamin D supplements
Alcoholism:Alcohol consumption compromises bone health and increases the risk of osteoporosis as excessive alcohol interferes with calcium balance in the body.
Medications:Many drugs can affect bone metabolism. Medications that can cause bone loss include
Heparin
Warfarin
Cyclosporine
Glucocorticoids
Medroxyprogesterone acetate
Cancer drugs
Thyroid medications

Did you know?
Women can get predisposed to a number of health conditions with advancing age.
Watch this video to know about tests for women above 35 years of age.


DIAGNOSIS OF OSTEOPOROSIS
Diagnosis Of Osteoporosis

Osteoporosis may not show definite symptoms, but recurrent falls can indicate it, as osteoporosis may cause muscle weakness. The diagnosis consists of the following:
SCREENING AND HISTORY
Screening and history
Older adults at higher risk of osteoporosis must be screened periodically and evaluated for fracture risk. During regular check-ups, a patient's previous history of fractures due to falls, smoking, and alcohol intake details, menopausal status, and medication history must be taken and recorded.
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
Physical examination
The physical examination must include height, weight, and body mass index to determine any loss of height. BMI less than21 kg/m²and loss of 5 cm or more are considered risk factors for osteoporosis. The presence of walking disorders, weakness, and postural instability increase the risk of fractures and falls.
IMAGING TESTS
Imaging tests
1. Bone mineral density (BMD):This test gives a snapshot of bone health by estimating the amount of calcium and other minerals in bones. This is the gold standard for diagnosing osteoporosis, and it utilizes an x-ray, known as a DXA scan, especially in the hip and spine, to determine bone loss.
T-Scoresand WHO diagnostic criteria for osteoporosis include:
Normal:1.0 and higher
Osteopenia (loss of BMD):1.0 to −2.5
Osteoporosis:−2.5 and lower
Severe osteoporosis:−2.5 and lower with one or more fragility fractures

Note:FRAX (Fracture Risk Assessment Tool) considers risk factors and BMD measurements to predict the probability of major osteoporotic fractures.
2. QCT:Quantitative computed tomography (QCT) is a test to measure bone mineral density d using computed tomography (CT). It is generally used to measure BMD of the spine or peripheral sites.
LABORATORY TESTS
Laboratory tests
To determine other causes of osteoporosis, blood tests may be needed. They include:
Calcium tests
Vitamin D tests
Tests for specific hormones(as discussed in risk factors)
BIOCHEMICAL MARKERS OF BONE TURNOVER
Biochemical markers of bone turnover
These have been used widely in clinical research and help determine the bone formation and resorption products released into the circulation. These include various bone-formation markers and bone-resorption markers.


Get your tests done in the comfort and safety of your house with just a click.
Book Now


CELEBS AFFECTED
Celebs affectedSally FieldShe is an American actress who has received many awards and nominations. Sally Field is a spokesperson for osteoporosis awareness after being diagnosed with it in 2005. In an interview, she talked about her family history and recommended all women undergo a bone density scan as part of their health regime.Blythe DannerShe is an American actor who has become a vocal advocate for osteoporosis awareness. "I am so grateful for it because it has made me do something consistently, to do everything I can to make my bones stronger," she told CBS News in 2011.
SPECIALISTS TO VISIT
Specialists To Visit

Doctors that can help detect and treat osteoporosis include:
Rheumatologist
Endocrinologist
Orthopedic surgeon
A rheumatologist is a specialist who treats patients with age-related bone diseases. An endocrinologist sees patients with hormone-related issues, and an orthopedic surgeon fixes fractures.

Do not take your bone health lightly. If you have any risk factors, seek advice from our trusted doctors.
Consult Now


PREVENTION OF OSTEOPOROSIS
Prevention Of Osteoporosis

Your genes may affect your height, weight, and bone density, but a healthy lifestyle can protect your bones. Here are a few tips to prevent osteoporosis:
EARLY SCREENING IS VITAL
Early screening is vital
Early screening can identify the risk factors for osteoporosis, which can help you make the right lifestyle changes to prevent it.
BASK IN THE SUNLIGHT
Bask in the sunlight
Insufficient exposure to sunlight may be associated with many disorders, and getting sufficient and healthy sunlight helps strengthen teeth and bones, which in turn helps in preventing osteoporosis.
OPTIMIZE CALCIUM AND VITAMIN D INTAKE
Optimize calcium and Vitamin D intake
Calcium is essential for maintaining bone health. Vitamin D is vital for healthy bones and teeth as it aids in the absorption of calcium in the body. However, it can be hard to get enough from food alone. So, consider taking vitamin D and calcium supplements.


Here is a comprehensive guide to all Vitamin D sources.
Click To Read
STOP SMOKING AND DRINK ALCOHOL IN MODERATION
Stop smoking and drink alcohol in moderation
Smoking and alcohol are associated with an increased risk of osteoporosis. So quitting smoking and limiting your alcohol intake can help prevent osteoporosis.

Are you trying to quit smoking?
Know more about tips that can help you with it.
Read This Now
NO EXCUSES FOR NOT EXERCISING
No excuses for not exercising
Exercises like walking, dancing, low-impact aerobics, elliptical training machines, and stair climbing work directly on the bones in your legs, hips, and lower spine and can slow mineral loss.

Learn more about 6 everyday habits that can prevent osteoporosis.
Tap Now


TREATMENT OF OSTEOPOROSIS
Treatment Of Osteoporosis

Treatment recommendations are often based on the risk of breaking a bone and slowing down the bone loss process. It consists of the following:
NON- PHARMACOLOGICAL MANAGEMENT
Non- pharmacological management
This includes making specific lifestyle changes like increasing calcium and vitamin D intake, weight-bearing exercise, smoking cessation, limiting alcohol/caffeine consumption, and preventing falls.
PHARMACOLOGICAL MANAGEMENT
Pharmacological management
The goal of pharmacological therapy is to reduce the risk of fractures. It includes medications like:
1. Antiresorptive agents:These drugs slow down the resorption of the bone. They include:
Bisphosphonate:These decrease bone resorption by limiting the activity of bone destruction cells.
Note:Oral bisphosphonates should be administered with a full glass of water in the morning on an empty stomach 30 minutes before a meal or other medications.
Denosumab:This drug is used as first-line therapy for patients at high risk of fracture and for patients who are not able to use oral therapy as denosumab is available as an injectable formulation
2. Hormonal therapies:These use synthetic hormones to manage osteoporosis. They include:
Estrogen agonists/antagonists:This class of drugs is also known as selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs). It includes:
Raloxifene
Conjugated estrogens/bazedoxifene
Estrogen-progestin therapy:In osteoporotic management, estrogen therapy is FDA-approved only for the prevention of osteoporosis in high-risk postmenopausal women.
Testosterone therapy:This therapy is recommended for those for whom antiosteoporotic treatment is contraindicated, whose testosterone levels are less than200 mg/dL, or those at borderline high risk for fracture.
Calcitonin:It is a synthetic polypeptide hormone with properties similar to natural calcitonin. It is FDA approved treatment for osteoporosis in women who have been postmenopausal for more than five years when alternative therapies are not feasible.
Parathyroid hormone analogues:These are synthetic forms of parathyroid hormones used to treat osteoporosis. Drugs include;
Teriparatide
Abaloparatide
3. Newer drugs:These include:
Romosozumab
Odanacatib
Lasofoxifene

Order your medications from India's largest online pharmacy.

Fill Your Prescription Now
HOME-CARE FOR OSTEOPOROSIS
Home-care For Osteoporosis

The best home remedies to reduce the risk of osteoporosis and to strengthen the bones is to eat foods rich in calcium and Vitamin D. These include:
1. Milk:It is a rich source of calcium and vitamin D, the two essential nutrients for bone growth and development.
2.Apple cider vinegar:It is abundant in nutrients like calcium, potassium, and magnesium, which can help enhance your bone health.


Check out our range of apple cider vinegar products to keep your gut happy and healthy.
Buy Now
3.Cheese:Studiessuggest that cheese, especially Parmesan is an excellent food for bone health and osteoporosis prevention.
4. Eggs:Researchdemonstrated that whole eggs could prevent osteoporosis and reduce the risk of fractures in the elderly.
5. Fish:Fatty varieties such as salmon, mackerel, tuna, and sardines are rich in Vitamin D and can help individuals with osteoporosis.
6. Citrus fruits:Fruits rich inVitamin C, likeoranges, can help your body produce what it needs for strong bones.
7. Green leafy vegetables:Dark leafy greens like Chinese cabbage, kale, and turnip greens are rich sources of calcium.
8.Sesame(Til):It contains copper, calcium, manganese, magnesium, and selenium and is ideal for people with calcium deficiencies.


Want to know some amazing health benefits of sesame?
Read This
9. Soy:Soy sprouts contain coumestrol (a potent phytoestrogen), which can decrease the risk of osteoporosis by increasing estrogen levels.
COMPLICATIONS OF OSTEOPOROSIS
Complications Of Osteoporosis

If osteoporosis is detected early and treated, the outcomes are good. However, if the condition remains untreated, it can lead to chronic pain and fractures. Complications of osteoporosis include:
1. Recurrent falls:Studiesshow that people with osteoporosis have a higher risk of falls due to muscle weakness, spine kyphosis, or decreased postural control.
2. Pathological fractures:These are the most severe complication of osteoporosis, particularly in the hip or spinal column.Hip fractures often result from falls and can lead to disability and even increased mortality risk in the first following the injury.Vertebral fractures: These can cause kyphosis (hunchback), chronic pain, respiratory issues, and a high risk of developingpneumonia.

Our wide range of support and braces help you in dealing with osteoporosis.
Explore Here


ALTERNATIVE THERAPIES FOR OSTEOPOROSIS
Alternative Therapies For Osteoporosis

The main aim of alternative therapies is to work with conventional treatment to provide relief. Always talk to your doctor before starting anything new. Alternative therapies that work best for osteoporosis include:
MASSAGE THERAPY
Massage therapy
Massages can alleviate symptoms of osteoporosis, like pain and swelling, by relaxing your muscles. According to astudy, taking a massage, significantly Thai massage can help you to increase your bone formation.
ACUPUNCTURE
Acupuncture
Acupuncture is a therapy used in traditional Chinese medicine that involves placing very thin needles at strategic points on the body.Studiesshow that acupuncture could be an effective therapy for treating osteoporosis as it promotes healing.

Is acupuncture effective in managing chronic pain?
To Know More, Read This Now
TAI CHI
Tai chi
Tai chi improves muscle strength and coordination and reduces muscle or joint pain and stiffness. This ancient Chinese practice uses a series of body postures that flow smoothly and gently from one to the next. However, there needs to be precise data available on the effectiveness of Tai chi for osteoporosis.
MELATONIN THERAPY
Melatonin therapyMelatonin is a hormone produced by the brain that is responsible for sleep.Studieshave demonstrated that melatonin supplementation can improve perimenopausal- and age-related osteoporosis and avoid bone loss.
LIVING WITH OSTEOPOROSIS
Living With Osteoporosis

You can lead an active and fulfilling life even if you have osteoporosis. All you need to do is make specific lifestyle changes. Tips that can help you if you are living with osteoporosis include:
PREVENT FALLS
Prevent falls
The major complication of osteoporosis is fracturing due to falls. Things to keep in mind to prevent falls include:
Wear shoes with non-slip bottoms
Make sure there is nothing slippery on the floor
Always grab bars in the bathrooms and railings on stairs
Do not keep throw rugs and loose wires and cords lying around
Always keep the lighting bright so that you can see well
USE HIP PROTECTORS
Use hip protectors
This is a different approach to the prevention of hip fractures. Hip protectors are rigid inserts used to prevent direct trauma to the hip. Hip protectors must be helpful in the bedridden elderly population.
TAKE EXTRA CARE OF BROKEN BONES
Take extra care of broken bones
Fractures usually take 6 to 8 weeks to heal, and osteoporosis does not affect how long this takes. Recovery depends on the type of fracture; while some fractures heal efficiently, others may require more intervention.
Note:You may need a physiotherapist's help to recover as much as possible.
MANAGE YOUR PAIN
Manage your pain
Pain is subjective and different for every individual. Ways to manage pain include:
Take pain medications
Try warm baths or hot packs and cold packs
Opt for relaxation techniques and hypnosis.

Try our exclusive bone and joint care products to manage your pain.
Explore Now
Did our information help you?In our relentless endeavour to keep improving our services, you are our eyes. Kindly take out sometime to guide us on how to serve your better.Share your feedbackSubscribe to stay informedSubscribe to our carefully crafted informative emailers by Medical Experts and be the first to get the latest health news, tips and important updates.SubmitDisclaimerTata 1mg's sole intention is to ensure that its consumers get information that is expert-reviewed, accurate and trustworthy. However, the information contained herein should NOT be used as a substitute for the advice of a qualified physician. The information provided here is for informational purposes only. This may not cover all possible side effects, drug interactions or warnings or alerts. Please consult your doctor and discuss all your queries related to any disease or medicine. We intend to support, not replace, the doctor-patient relationship.

--- REFERENCES ---

- Keen MU, Reddivari AKR. Osteoporosis In Females. [Updated 2022 Aug 7]. In: StatPearls [Internet].Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2022 Jan-.Available from:  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK559156/)
- Overview of osteoporosis. Osteoporosis. National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Disorders. Dec 2022.Available from:  (https://www.niams.nih.gov/health-topics/osteoporosis )
- Dobbs MB, Buckwalter J, Saltzman C. Osteoporosis: the increasing role of the orthopaedist. Iowa Orthop J. 1999;19:43-52. PMID: 10847516; PMCID: PMC1888612.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1888612/#:)
- Vilaca, T., Eastell, R. and Schini, M. orcid.org/0000-0003-2204-2095 (2022) Osteoporosis in men. Lancet Diabetes & Endocrinology, 10 (4). pp. 273-283. ISSN 2213-8595.  (https://eprints.whiterose.ac.uk/184897/3/Male%20OP%20v4.1%20clean%2007Jan22%20.pdf)
- Mirza F, Canalis E. Management of endocrine disease: Secondary osteoporosis: pathophysiology and management. Eur J Endocrinol. 2015 Sep;173(3):R131-51.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4534332/#:)
- Causes. Osteoporosis. National Health Services (NHS) UK. Oct 2022.  (https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/osteoporosis/causes/)
- Fox KM, Cummings SR, Powell-Threets K, Stone K. Family history and risk of osteoporotic fracture. Study of Osteoporotic Fractures Research Group. Osteoporos Int. 1998;8(6):557-562.  (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10326061/#)
- Jakob F., Seefried L, Schwab M. Alter und Osteoporose. Auswirkungen der Alterung auf die Osteoporose, deren Diagnostik und Therapie Age and Osteoporosis. Effects of aging on osteoporosis, the diagnosis and therapy. Internist (Berl). 2014;55(7):755-761.  (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24903137/)
- Hsu CY, Chen LR, Chen KH. Osteoporosis in Patients with Chronic Kidney Diseases: A Systematic Review. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Sep 18;21(18):6846.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7555655/#:)
- Nancy E et al. Epidemiology, etiology, and diagnosis of osteoporosis.American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology (2006) 194, S3–11.  (https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/document?repid=rep1&type=pdf&doi=b45fae0d684cd289b6dc62b02bcba7b1c7571ff8 )
- Gaudio A, Xourafa A, Rapisarda R, Zanoli L, Signorelli SS, Castellino P. Hematological Diseases and Osteoporosis. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 May 16;21(10):3538.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7279036/#:)
- Pouresmaeili F, Kamalidehghan B, Kamarehei M, Goh YM. A comprehensive overview on osteoporosis and its risk factors. Ther Clin Risk Manag. 2018 Nov 6;14:2029-2049.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6225907/)
- Cizza G, Primma S, Csako G. Depression as a risk factor for osteoporosis. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2009 Oct;20(8):367-73.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2764354/)
- Rolvien T et al. Disuse Osteoporosis: Clinical and Mechanistic. Calcified Tissue International (2022) 110:592–604.  (https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/s00223-021-00836-1.pdf?pdf=button%20sticky)
- Facts about osteoporosis. Smoking and bone health. NIH Osteoporosis And Related Bone Disease. National Resource Centre. Dec 2018.  (https://www.bones.nih.gov/health-info/bone/osteoporosis/conditions-behaviors/bone-smoking#:)
- J. Barnsley et al. Pathophysiology and treatment of osteoporosis: challenges for clinical
practice with older people. Aging Clinical and Experimental Research (2021) 33:759–773.  (https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/s40520-021-01817-y.pdf?pdf=button)
- Sözen T, Özışık L, Başaran NÇ. An overview and management of osteoporosis. Eur J Rheumatol. 2017 Mar;4(1):46-56.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5335887/ )
- P Truck et al. Osteoporosis. Postgrad Med J 2002;78:526–532.  (https://pmj.bmj.com/content/postgradmedj/78/923/526.full.pdf)
- Chitra V, Sharon S. E. Diagnosis, Screening and Treatment of Osteoporosis – A Review. Biomed Pharmacol J 2021;14(2).  (https://biomedpharmajournal.org/vol14no2/diagnosis-screening-and-treatment-of-osteoporosis-a-review/)
- Meyer, F., König, H., & Hajek, A. (2019). Osteoporosis, Fear of Falling, and Restrictions in Daily Living. Evidence From a Nationally Representative Sample of Community-Dwelling Older Adults. Frontiers in Endocrinology, 10.  (https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fendo.2019.00646/full#)
- Pampaloni B, Bartolini E, Brandi ML. Parmigiano Reggiano cheese and bone health. Clin Cases Miner Bone Metab. 2011 Sep;8(3):33-6.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3279064/)
- Pujia R, Ferro Y, Maurotti S, Mare R, Arturi F, Montalcini T, Pujia A, Mazza E. Relationship between Osteoporosis, Multiple Fractures, and Egg Intake in Healthy Elderly. J Midlife Health. 2021 Oct-Dec;12(4):287-293.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8849143/#)
- Saetung S, Chailurkit LO, Ongphiphadhanakul B. Thai traditional massage increases biochemical markers of bone formation in postmenopausal women: a randomized crossover trial. BMC Complement Altern Med. 2013 Mar 25;13:69.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3770450/)
- Pan H, Jin R, Li M, Liu Z, Xie Q, Wang P. The Effectiveness of Acupuncture for Osteoporosis: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Am J Chin Med. 2018;46(3):489-513.  (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29614884/)
- Papadopoulou SK, Papadimitriou K, Voulgaridou G, Georgaki E, Tsotidou E, Zantidou O, Papandreou D. Exercise and Nutrition Impact on Osteoporosis and Sarcopenia-The Incidence of Osteosarcopenia: A Narrative Review. Nutrients. 2021 Dec 16;13(12):4499.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8705961/#:)
- Salari N, Ghasemi H, Mohammadi L, et al. The global prevalence of osteoporosis in the world: a comprehensive systematic review and meta-analysis. J Orthop Surg Res. 2021;16(1):609. Published 2021 Oct 17.  (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34657598/#)
