https://www.1mg.com/diseases/pancreatic-cancer-224#

PANCREATIC CANCER
Pancreatic cancer
OVERVIEW
Overview
The pancreas is a small, spongy, hockey stick-shaped gland located between the stomach and the spine, deep within the abdomen. The major function of the pancreas is to release enzymes that help in digestion and produce hormones, insulin and glucagon, that help control blood sugar levels.

Pancreatic cancer occurs when the body’s normal process of removing old cells and forming new cells, breaks down. The pancreatic cells continue to grow out of control and form tumors. The cancerous cells can also spread to other parts of the body. The most common type of cancer that forms in the pancreas begins in the cells that line the ducts that carry digestive enzymes out of the pancreas, called pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.

Pancreatic cancer is typically a disease of the elderly. 90% of newly diagnosed patients are aged over 55 years. It is more common in men than in women. Various risk factors associated with the disease are smoking,obesity, excessive consumption of alcohol,diabetesand hereditary factors amongst others.

It is generally not detected at an early stage, when it is curable, because it often doesn't show any symptoms until it has spread to other organs. The treatment options are based on the extent of the cancer and may include surgery, chemotherapy, radiation therapy, or a combination of these. However, mostly due to late detection, the prognosis or outcome of the disease is generally poor.
KEY FACTS
Key FactsUsually seen inAdults above 55 years of ageGender affectedBoth men and women but more common in menBody part(s) involvedPancreasLymph nodesLiverPeritoneumMimicking ConditionsAcute pancreatitisChronic pancreatitisCholangitisCholecystitisCholedochal cystPeptic ulcer diseaseCholangiocarcinomaGastric cancerNecessary health tests/imagingImaging tests:CT scan,PET-CT scan,Ultrasound, andMagnetic resonance imaging (MRI)Blood tests:Bilirubin totalBiopsy:Fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC), and core needle biopsyTreatmentSurgical management:Pancreatectomy, Laparoscopic surgery & Vascular resection.Adjuvant chemotherapy:ModifiedLeucovorin,5-Fluorouracil,Irinotecan&Oxaliplatin.Radiotherapy:External beam radiation therapy & BrachytherapyTargeted therapy:PembrolizumabSpecialists to consultGastroenterologistOncologistRelated NGOsPancreatic cancer action networkCancercareSee All
SYMPTOMS OF PANCREATIC CANCER
Symptoms Of Pancreatic Cancer

Most people don’t experience early signs of pancreatic cancer. The doctor may suspect pancreatic cancer if the patient has recently developeddiabetesorpancreatitis(a painful condition due to the inflammation of the pancreas). As the disease progresses, people may notice symptoms like:
Pain in the upper abdomen, radiating to the back
Jaundice(yellowing of the skin and the whites of the eyes)
Tirednessand fatigue
Loss of appetite
Light-colored stools
Dark-colored urine
Loss of weight
Formation of blood clots in the body
Dry and itchy skin
Worseningdiabetesor a new diagnosis
Nauseaandvomiting

PNETs (Pancreatic Neuroendocrine Tumors) are rare pancreatic cancers that develop in hormone-producing cells. They may cause unique symptoms due to excess hormone production like:
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome (in which the stomach makes too much acid) causing stomach ulcers
Irritations on the tongue and corners of the mouth
Malnutrition
Shortness of breath
Rashes or blisters on the skin
Excessive thirst

Quality cancer care should never be uncertain. At Tata 1mg, we are dedicated to providing the support, resources, and guidance you need at every step of your journey.
Explore Cancer Care Platform
TYPES OF PANCREATIC CANCER
Types Of Pancreatic Cancer

Types of pancreatic cancer based on their cell of origin include:
EXOCRINE PANCREATIC CANCER

Exocrine pancreatic cancer
Most of the pancreatic tumors are exocrine tumors. They start in the exocrine cells (that produce enzymes for digestion) of the pancreas and include:

Adenocarcinoma:The most common type of pancreatic cancer is adenocarcinoma. It is an exocrine tumor that starts in the cells lining the pancreatic duct, which make enzymes for digestion.
Mucinous cystic neoplasm:This is an invasive adenocarcinoma and is a cyst filled with thick fluid. Mucinous cystic neoplasms can be non-cancerous (benign) if they are not invasive.

Other rare exocrine tumors include:
Squamous cell carcinoma:This is extremely rare and forms in the pancreatic ducts, and is made purely of squamous cells, which are not typically seen in the pancreas.
Adenosquamous carcinoma:This is the rarest type of pancreatic cancer. It is a more aggressive tumor with a poorer prognosis.
Colloid carcinoma: These develop from a benign cyst called an intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN).
NEUROENDOCRINE PANCREATIC CANCER

Neuroendocrine pancreatic cancer
Neuroendocrine tumors (pancreatic NETs or PNETs) come from the abnormal growth of endocrine cells in the pancreas called islet cells, which are responsible for controlling blood sugar levels (hence called islet cell tumors).

PNETs are classified by the hormones they make and common types include:
Gastrinoma:A gastrin-producing tumor usually located in the pancreas or the duodenal wall. Gastrin is a peptide hormone that stimulates the secretion of gastric acid.
Glucagonoma:Glucagonoma is a very rare tumor of the islet cells of the pancreas, which leads to an excess of the hormone glucagon in the blood.
Insulinoma:Pancreatic tumor that leads to extra insulin production causinghypoglycemia (low blood sugar).
Somatostatinoma:They start in neuroendocrine cells that make the hormone somatostatin.
VIPoma:A non-beta pancreatic islet cell tumor secreting vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP).
Nonfunctional islet cell tumor:A tumor arising from the rare pancreatic islet cell and no hormone is involved.
CAUSES OF PANCREATIC CANCER
Causes Of Pancreatic Cancer

The exact cause of pancreatic cancer is unknown.Pancreatic cancer occurs when abnormal cells begin to grow within the pancreas. These abnormal cells develop because of changes (mutations) in their DNA.This mutated DNA dictates the cells grow uncontrollably and continue living after normal cells die.These masses of cells can form a tumor. When left untreated, these cells continue to

Did you know?
The last day of February every year is World Rare Disease Day and it is celebrated to raise awareness about rare diseases. Learn more about facts on rare diseases in India.Click Here To Read More
RISK FACTORS FOR PANCREATIC CANCER
Risk Factors For Pancreatic Cancer

Despite other gastrointestinal tumors, evidence of risk factors for the development of pancreatic cancer is poor and can be classified into environmental factors and genetic factors:
ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS

Environmental factors
These can be further classified into modifiable and non-modifiable factors that increase the risk of an individual developing pancreatic cancer. They include:

1. Modifiable factors


Smoking

Say No to smoking with our widest range of smoking cessation products.
Quit This Habit Today

Alcohol consumption (Pancreatic cancer is associated with heavy alcohol consumption of > 30 g per day)
Chronic pancreatitis
Obesity
Diet
Infection ( people with Helicobacter pylori (H-pylori) or hepatitis C infections)
Exposure at the workplace(metalworking and pesticides has been recognized as a potential risk factor.

2. Non-modifiable factors


Age:Pancreatic cancer generally occurs in patients over 55 years old, mostly between 70-80 years.
Sex:The incidence of PC is lower in women than in men globally. This difference is even more evident in developed nations.
Geographic location:The incidence rate in Africa is the lowest, and higher cases of development of cancer are seen in China.
Blood group:Studies have shown that people with type A, AB, or B blood groups have a higher risk of developing PC than those with type O.
Diabetes:can raise the risk of pancreatic cancer and might also be an early sign of it, with HbA1c being studied as a possible tool for early detection.
Gut Microflora:Lower levels of Neisseria elongata and Streptococcus mitis, and higher levels of Porphyromonas gingivalis and Granulicatella adiacens are associated with an increased risk of pancreatic cancer.
GENETIC FACTORS

Genetic factors
Certain genetic mutations and syndromes significantly increase the risk of pancreatic cancer. These include:

Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer Syndrome (HBOC)
Lynch Syndrome (HNPCC)
Familial Atypical Multiple Mole Melanoma Syndrome (FAMMM)
Hereditary Pancreatitis (HP)
Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP)
Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome (PJS)
Cystic Fibrosis (CF)Did you know?
Individuals suffering from cancer are at a higher risk of contracting the COVID- 19 infection. Strong immunity is needed to fight against the coronavirus infection. Read about how to stay healthy during COVID-19 outbreak.Click Here
DIAGNOSIS OF PANCREATIC CANCER
Diagnosis Of Pancreatic Cancer

Pancreatic cancer is challenging to diagnose, often presenting late with advanced or metastatic disease, depending on tumor size, location, and spread. Depending on this the cancer is divided into 5 stages. These are:
Stage 0:Also known as carcinoma in situ and is characterized by abnormal cells in the lining of the pancreas. The cells could become cancerous and spread to nearby tissue.
Stage 1:Presence of tumor (cancerous cells) in the pancreas.
Stage 2:The presence of a tumor in the pancreas, which has spread to nearby tissues, organs, or lymph nodes.
Stage 3:Spread of cancer to major blood vessels near the pancreas. It may have also spread to nearby lymph nodes.
Stage 4:In this stage, cancer has spread to distant organs in the body like the liver, lungs, or abdominal cavity along with tissues or lymph nodes near the pancreas.

Cancer is one of the most dreaded diseases and can be difficult to treat if it has progressed to an advanced stage at the time of diagnosis. Read more about 8 common signs of cancer that you should know.
Click Now

The diagnosis consists of the following:
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION

Physical examination
The doctor will examine the patient's skin, tongue, and eyes to see if they are yellow, a sign of jaundice.
An abnormal buildup of fluid in the abdomen, calledascites, may be another sign of cancer.
BLOOD TESTS

Blood tests
The doctor may take samples of blood to check for abnormal levels ofbilirubinand other substances.
Bilirubin is a chemical that may reach high levels in people with pancreatic cancer due to blockage of the common bile duct by a tumor.


IMAGING TESTS
Imaging tests
These tests help doctors find out where the cancer is located and whether it has spread from the pancreas to other parts of the body.Computed tomography (CT or CAT) scan:Pancreatic protocol CT scans use contrast to precisely locate tumors and assess their relation to nearby organs and blood vessels.

Positron emission tomography (PET) scan orPET-CT scan:Combines PET and CT/MRI to create detailed images for a comprehensive evaluation of the affected area.

Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP):A gastroenterologist uses an endoscope to examine bile ducts and place stents, though it's not commonly used for diagnosis.

Ultrasound:Uses sound waves to visualize internal organs, with options like transabdominal ultrasound for the abdomen or endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) for detailed imaging via an endoscope.

Percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography (PTC):X-ray procedure to detect bile duct blockages caused by tumors, using a needle to inject dye for imaging.

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI):Produces detailed images of the body and tumor size, with MRCP (Magnetic Resonance Cholangiopancreatography) specialized for assessing pancreatic ducts and related issues.


Get all your tests done with utmost safety and accurate results with Tata 1mg.
Book Your Tests Now
BIOPSY
Biopsy
A biopsy removes a small amount of tissue for examination under a microscope. It can make a definite diagnosis for most cancers. There are a couple of different ways to collect a tissue sample:
Fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC):It is the tissue sample removal by aspiration from the needle.
Core needle biopsy:The doctor uses a hollow needle to remove pieces of pancreatic tissue from a suspicious area.


TESTING FOR POTENTIAL BIOMARKERS
Testing for potential biomarkers
CA 19-9 is a key marker for monitoring pancreatic cancer.
Researchers are exploring breath tests and DNA changes in pancreatic fluids to detect cancer early.
PREVENTION OF PANCREATIC CANCER
Prevention Of Pancreatic Cancer


Preventing pancreatic cancer is challenging due to its complex risk factors, including genetics, lifestyle, and environmental factors.
While complete prevention isn’t guaranteed, steps like avoiding smoking and alcohol, adopting a healthy lifestyle, managing chronic conditions, and considering genetic counseling or screening for high-risk individuals can help reduce the risk.

Note:Genetic testing for BRCA2 mutations or p16INK4A inactivity, along with secondary screening, may be recommended for individuals at high risk of pancreatic cancer.Did you know?
You can prevent certain types of cancer with vaccines. Like BCG vaccines, cancer vaccines protect our body from viruses that can cause diseases which can develop into cancer. Read to know more about it.Click Now
SPECIALIST TO VISIT
Specialist To Visit

Cancer is not a single disease but a group of related diseases. Hence, it requires comprehensive care. Doctors who take care of patients with pancreatic cancer and help in diagnosing and formulating a treatment plan are:
Gastroenterologist
Oncologist

Agastroenterologistis a doctor who treats diseases of the esophagus, stomach, small intestine, colon and rectum, pancreas, and gallbladder.

Anoncologistis a doctor who treats cancer and provides medical care for a person diagnosed with cancer.

If you are facing such an issue, seek advice from our trusted professionals.
Consult Now
TREATMENT OF PANCREATIC CANCER
Treatment Of Pancreatic Cancer


Pancreatic cancer requires multidisciplinary treatment that includes:
1. SURGICAL MANAGEMENT

1. Surgical management
Pancreatectomy:The Whipple procedure (pancreaticoduodenectomy) or pancreatectomy (partial or total removal of the pancreas) is used to treat pancreatic cancer based on the tumor's location.
Laparoscopic surgery:It is a minimally invasive procedure to access the abdomen or pelvis, often used for distal pancreatectomy.
Vascular resection:Pancreatic cancer resection includes total pancreatectomy, distal pancreatectomy plus splenectomy (removal of the spleen).

2. CHEMOTHERAPY
2. Chemotherapy
Modifiedleucovorin, 5-fluorouracil,irinotecan, andoxaliplatin(MFOLFIRINOX) for 6 months
Gemcitabineandcapecitabinecombined for 6 months
Folfirinox regimen, gemcitabine, andPac-Nabin combination with chemotherapy in patients with metastasis
Gemcitabine (with or withouterlotinib) combined with 54 Gy (radiation dose) is used for patients with locally advanced pancreatic cancer.

Finding it difficult to get all the medications on time? Well, we have you covered. Order from India’s most trusted online pharmacy for guaranteed delivery.
Order Now

3. RADIOTHERAPY
3. Radiotherapy
Radiation therapy uses X-rays to destroy or damage cancer cells, making them unable to proliferate. Radiotherapy is mainly used in patients with locally advanced pancreatic cancer. It uses:
External beam radiation therapy:This uses external radiation therapy sources that emit X-rays, gamma rays, electrons or heavy particles.

Brachytherapy:It is a type of internal radiation therapy in which seeds, ribbons, or capsules that contain a radiation source are placed inside the body, or near the tumors.
4. TARGETED THERAPY

4. Targeted therapy
This is very successful in many types of cancer, though, to date, all other targeted drugs have failed in pancreatic cancer patients.
Recently the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approvedpembrolizumabas a targeted treatment for pancreatic cancer.

5. LATEST TREATMENT PROTOCOLS
5. Latest treatment protocols

Gene therapy:Gene therapy delivers specific genes to cancer cells, which are often carried by specially designed viruses.
Cancer stem cells:Research currently focuses on identifying treatments that may specifically target pancreatic cancer stem cells.
Genetic/molecular studies:Many new research developments are based on identifying damaged genes and proteins and repairing or changing how they work.
Circulating tumor (ct)DNA:ctDNA is studied to monitor treatment response, detect early disease recurrence, and identify resistance to treatment.
6. OTHER TREATMENT MODALITIES

6. Other treatment modalities
Percutaneous bile duct drainage:A procedure to drain bile to relieve pressure in the bile ducts caused by a blockage.
Surgical gastrojejunostomy:A surgical procedure in which an anastomosis is created between the stomach and the proximal loop of the jejunum.
Endoscopic duodenal stents:A stent is a small metal mesh tube placed in the narrowed or blocked area of your duodenum (the first part of the small intestine).Diagnosed with cancer?
Getting diagnosed with cancer can be shocking and it can be a better idea to get a second opinion before starting the treatment. Read about things you need to know if you plan to take a second opinion.Click To Learn More
HOME-CARE FOR PANCREATIC CANCER
Home-care For Pancreatic Cancer

Certain herbal or home remedies have shown beneficial results in managing the symptoms of pancreatic cancer, but they are just an adjunct and should not replace the conventional treatment. However, it is important to always consult your doctor before starting anything new.


Eucalyptus:Contains compounds with potential anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties that may aid in managing cancer symptoms.

How to use it?
Brew leaves into tea or use eucalyptus oil in aromatherapy.

Coix seed (Jau Ke Daane):Known for its anti-tumor and immune-boosting effects, it may aid in inhibiting cancer cell growth and improving immunity.

How to use it?
Boil seeds for porridge or grind into powder for smoothies.

Moringa (Sahjan):Rich in antioxidants and anti-inflammatory agents, it may help reduce oxidative stress and support overall health.

How to use it?
Add fresh leaves to dishes or mix moringa powder in water or tea.

Want to know other benefits of moringa?
Read ThisDid you know?
Walking may improve the quality of life for people with advanced cancer.Click To Know
COMPLICATIONS OF PANCREATIC CANCER
Complications Of Pancreatic Cancer

Pancreatic cancer progresses unchecked for a long time before symptoms are recognized. Complications of pancreatic cancer include:


1. COMMON COMPLICATIONS
1. Common complications
Jaundice
Weight loss
Muscle wasting (cancer cachexia)
Abdominal pain
Diabetes

2. GENERAL COMPLICATIONS AFTER RESECTION OF THE PANCREAS
2. General complications after resection of the pancreas
Cardiac problems like angina (chest pain), infarction (heart attack) and arrhythmias
Stroke
Cardiorespiratory distress (increase in the number of breaths)
Kidney dysfunction
Pneumonia
Thrombosis (blood clots)
Pulmonary embolism (blood clot gets lodged in an artery in the lung)
Psychological disturbances
Hepatic (liver) and metabolic dysfunction.
3. SURGICAL COMPLICATIONS

3. Surgical complications
Intra-abdominal abscess (collection of pus in the inner lining of the stomach)
Hemorrhage (bleeding)
Fistulae of the pancreatointestinal anastomosis (an abnormal connection between pancreas and intestinal sutures).

Quality cancer care shouldn't be left to chance—Tata 1mg is here to support you with reliable access to expert care.
Explore Cancer Care Platform

ALTERNATIVE THERAPIES FOR PANCREATIC CANCER
Alternative Therapies For Pancreatic Cancer

The challenges of existing pancreatic cancer treatments have driven the search for new therapies that are showing promising results. However, these are still being studied and should only be considered under a doctor’s guidance. Some of these include:


1. MICROBIAL THERAPY
1. Microbial therapy
There is now strong evidence that the human microbiota plays a key role in regulating cancer development and response to cancer treatment.
The results of intestinal microflora forming systemic immunity and tumor-specific immunity in pancreatic cancer have been confirmed, but the mechanism remains to be studied.
2. IMMUNOTHERAPY

2. Immunotherapy
Immune checkpoint blockade (ICB) therapy is approved for several cancers likemelanoma,lung cancer, andkidney cancer.
However, pancreatic cancer is less responsive to immunotherapy because its tumor environment suppresses the immune system, and immunotherapy is currently under study and yet to be approved.
LIVING WITH PANCREATIC CANCER
Living With Pancreatic Cancer

Whether you're a patient or a caregiver, living with pancreatic cancer significantly impacts daily life and requires careful consideration of various factors. Tips that can help include:
1. MANAGING THE EMOTIONS
1. Managing the emotions
Getting all the information needed to go about with the treatment
Talking to loved ones
Joining support groups
Understanding the physical limitations
Starting palliative care to get relief from other symptoms
Coping with practical issues like:
Financial expenses
Childcare
Work issues


2. SURVIVING THE PHYSICAL SIDE EFFECTS
2. Surviving the physical side effects
Talk to the doctors and healthcare team regularly about the feelings
Keep a track about any new side effects or changes in existing side effects and inform your doctor immediately
Get treatment for long-term side effects and late effects.


3. SUPERVISING THE COSTS OF CANCER CARE
3. Supervising the costs of cancer care
Understanding the cost of the treatment
Encouraging the patients and their families to talk about financial concerns with a member of their healthcare team
Getting support from organizations that help with treatment, housing, travel, and other cancer-related costs.


4. FOCUSING ON DIET
4. Focusing on diet
Sticking to smaller and lighter meals throughout the day
Avoiding very high-fiber foods such as cereal and dried fruit in case of diarrhea
Sipping a nutritional supplement between meals to boost the calorie intake
Maintaining blood sugar levels
Taking enzyme supplements


5. PREPARING FOR THE TREATMENT
5. Preparing for the treatment
Understanding prehabilitation ( getting ready for cancer treatment in whatever time you have before it starts)
Preparing mentally and physically for the treatment
Eating a wide range of foods in the right proportion


6. GETTING FOLLOW-UP CARE
6. Getting follow-up care
Regular follow-up visits with exams and tests are crucial after treatment.
Some side effects may persist or appear years later.
Report new symptoms promptly, as they could indicate recurrence or a new issue.


Cancer can drain a person physically and mentally. Gaining knowledge and awareness about cancer and the myths that surround it is necessary to enable timely diagnosis and treatment.
Click To Know
Did our information help you?In our relentless endeavour to keep improving our services, you are our eyes. Kindly take out sometime to guide us on how to serve your better.Share your feedbackSubscribe to stay informedSubscribe to our carefully crafted informative emailers by Medical Experts and be the first to get the latest health news, tips and important updates.SubmitDisclaimerTata 1mg's sole intention is to ensure that its consumers get information that is expert-reviewed, accurate and trustworthy. However, the information contained herein should NOT be used as a substitute for the advice of a qualified physician. The information provided here is for informational purposes only. This may not cover all possible side effects, drug interactions or warnings or alerts. Please consult your doctor and discuss all your queries related to any disease or medicine. We intend to support, not replace, the doctor-patient relationship.

--- REFERENCES ---

- McGuigan A, Kelly P, Turkington RC, Jones C, Coleman HG, McCain RS. Pancreatic cancer: A review of clinical diagnosis, epidemiology, treatment, and outcomes. World J Gastroenterol. 2018.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6250924/ )
- Midha S, Chawla S, Garg PK. Modifiable and non-modifiable risk factors for pancreatic cancer: A review. Cancer Lett 2016; 381: 269-277  (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27461582/)
- Pancreatic Cancer Types. Health. Johns Hopkins Medicine.  (https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/health/conditions-and-diseases/pancreatic-cancer/pancreatic-cancer-types)
- ZhiYu Zhao, Wei Liu. Pancreatic Cancer: A Review of Risk Factors, Diagnosis, and Treatment. Sage Publications. Dec 2020.  (https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/1533033820962117)
- Diagnosis of Pancreatic Cancer. Pancreatic Cancer: Diagnosis. Cancer.Net. Sep 2021.  (https://www.cancer.net/cancer-types/pancreatic-cancer/diagnosis)
- Vimalachandran D, Ghaneh P, Costello E, Neoptolemos JP. Genetics and prevention of pancreatic cancer. Cancer Control. 2004.  (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14749618/)
- Capasso M, Franceschi M, Rodriguez-Castro KI, et al. Epidemiology and risk factors of pancreatic cancer. Acta Biomed. 2018.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6502190/ )
- Halloran C.M, Ghaneh P, Bosonnet L, et al. Complications of Pancreatic Cancer Resection. Digestive Surgery. 2002.  (https://www.karger.com/Article/FullText/52029)
- Follow-up care. Living as a Pancreatic Cancer Survivor. American Cancer Society. Jun 2020.  (https://www.cancer.org/cancer/pancreatic-cancer/after-treatment/follow-up.html)
- Living with pancreatic cancer. Pancreatic cancer. Pancreatic Cancer Action. Apr 2022.  (https://pancreaticcanceraction.org/help-and-support/living-with-pancreatic-cancer/ )
- Pancreatic Exocrine Tumors. Types of Pancreatic Tumors. Pancreatic Cancer Action Network.  (https://www.pancan.org/facing-pancreatic-cancer/about-pancreatic-cancer/types-of-pancreatic-cancer/ )
- Li D. Diabetes and pancreatic cancer. Mol Carcinog. 2012.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3238796/#:~:text=Diabetes%20or%20impaired%20glucose%20tolerance,or%20during%20the%20cancer%20course. )
