https://www.1mg.com/diseases/snoring-544#

SNORING
SnoringAlso known as Wheeze, Snort, Snuffle
OVERVIEW
Overview
Snoring is a rattling breathing sound that is caused by improper air flow through a partially obstructed airway.

Males tend to snore more often than females, especially those who are above 40 years of age. Risk factors associated with snoring include deviated nasal septum, smaller jaws, and being overweight amongst other factors.

Snoring is usually light, occasional, and unconcerned. However, in some cases it may be a sign of some serious underlying sleep-related breathing disorder.

The severity of snoring may vary from person to person and treatment mainly focuses on treating the cause. Certain lifestyle modifications, medications, appliances, and surgeries may be recommended based on the cause and severity of snoring.
KEY FACTS
Key FactsUsually seen inAdults between 40-65 years of age.Gender affectedBoth men and women. But more common in men.Body part(s) involvedNoseHeadThroatMimicking ConditionsSleep apneaLaryngospasmNarcolepsyPeriodic limb movement disorderRestless leg syndromeCircadian rhythm disordersNecessary health tests/imagingMedical historyPhysical examinationImaging:Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI),Computerized tomography (CT)andX-raysDrug-induced sleep endoscopy (DISE)PolysomnographyTreatment1. Lifestyle changes
2. Medications:Cetirizine,Clemastine,Chlorpheniramine,Naphazoline,Oxymetazoline, andPhenylephrine.
3. Oral appliances
4. Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) device
5. Upper airway surgerySpecialists to consultOtolaryngologist or ENT specialistInternal medicine specialistAllergist or ImmunologistHead and neck surgeon
SYMPTOMS OF SNORING
Symptoms Of Snoring

Symptoms associated with snoring include:
Raspy sounds produced in the throat or nose during sleep may range from quiet vibrations to whistling, snorting, or rumbling.
Restless sleep
Waking up frequently at night feeling confused
Breathing pauses
Chest pain at night
Waking in the morning not feeling rested
Dry and sore throat upon awakening
Morning headaches
Excessive daytime sleepiness
Mood swings and irritability
Reduced levels of concentration
Impacted memoryDid you know?
How you snore can indicate why you snore.Read More
CAUSES OF SNORING
Causes Of Snoring

While breathing, air flows in and out through the nose or mouth and throat. There are relatively few sounds when we are sitting and breathing quietly.
While sleeping, there is a narrowing of the area at the back of the throat. The same amount of air passing through this smaller opening can increase the speed of air and cause the following tissues that surround the opening to vibrate:
Soft palate (the back of the roof of your mouth)
Tonsils
Adenoids
Tongue


This can cause the sounds of snoring. People who snore may have different reasons for the narrowing, discussed in detail in the next section.
RISK FACTORS FOR SNORING
Risk Factors for Snoring
1. ADVANCING AGE

1. Advancing age
Snoring becomes more common with age due to decreased muscle tone, causing airways to constrict. Research demonstrates that individuals above 40 years of age are at a higher risk.
2. GENDER
2. Gender
Males have narrower air passages than females and hence are more likely to snore.
3. FAMILY HISTORY
3. Family history
Individuals with a family history of snoring are more likely to snore.
4. NASAL AND SINUS PROBLEMS
4. Nasal and sinus problems
The following conditions can cause obstruction of airways and increase the risk of snoring:
Nasal congestion
Sinusitis
Deviated nasal septum
Nasal polyps


Get rid of your nasal congestion with our wide range of products.
Explore Now
5. STRUCTURE OF THE MOUTH, JAWS AND THROAT
5. Structure of the mouth, jaws and throat
Some of the structural changes associated with snoring include:
A smaller or backward-placed jaw
A larger tongue
A long soft palate or a long uvula
A cleft palate
A narrow throat
Enlarged tonsils
6.OBESITY
6.Obesity
Excess amount of fat around the face, and neck region, and poor muscle tone can predispose to snoring.
7. SLEEP POSTURE
7. Sleep posture
Sleeping flat on your back can cause the muscle of the throat to relax and block the airway leading to snoring.
8. SLEEP DEPRIVATION
8. Sleep deprivation
In case of lack of sleep, the throat muscles tend to relax too much, predisposing to snoring.


Tossing in bed and cannot fall asleep? Check out our widest range of sleep aid products to get your share of sound sleep.
Try Now
9. ALCOHOL
9. Alcohol
Alcohol consumption relaxes the throat muscles, increasing the risk of snoring.
10. SMOKING
10. Smoking
Smoking can cause upper airway inflammation and edema, increasing the likelihood of snoring.


Trying hard to quit smoking? Consider using our range of products designed to help you quit and break free from this harmful addiction.
Shop Here
11. CERTAIN MEDICATIONS
11. Certain Medications
Certain medicines like lorazepam and diazepam have the potential to relax throat muscles and restrict the airway which can lead to snoring.
12. LATER PHASE OF PREGNANCY
12. Later phase of Pregnancy
Hormonal changes, weight gain, and an increase in blood flow, during pregnancy may increase the risk of snoring. Snoring often worsens as the pregnancy progresses, peaking in the third trimester.
13. MENOPAUSE
13. Menopause
Hormonal changes, weight gain, and age-related loss of muscle tone in the throat area, associated with menopause can increase the likelihood of snoring, or worsen pre-existing snoring problems.
DIAGNOSIS OF SNORING
Diagnosis Of Snoring

Snoring is easily diagnosable. However, your doctor may advise a few tests, along with a detailed history and examination, to arrive at the cause of snoring.
1. MEDICAL HISTORY
1. Medical history
The doctor might inquire about your
Snoring habits
History of any medications or medical issues
Experience of reduced concentration, daytime sleepiness or any other associated symptoms.
May also ask your partner a few questions about your sleep pattern as well as when and how you snore.
2. PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
2. Physical examination
Your doctor can perform a physical exam to determine if your snoring is caused by any issues in your nose, mouth or upper airways.
3. IMAGING TESTS
3. Imaging tests
These tests help to check the structure of your airway for abnormalities, such as a deviated septum, or any other airway obstruction:
X-rays
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
Computerized tomography (CT)

Ensuring the comfort and safety of our patients is our top priority when conducting laboratory procedures. You can book your lab test conveniently from your home.
Book Here

4. OTHER TESTS
4. Other tests
Drug-induced sleep endoscopy (DISE)
It is a medical procedure used to diagnose sleep disorders related to breathing difficulties. It allows doctors to observe the upper respiratory tract of a patient while they are in a sleep-like state.
POLYSOMNOGRAPHY (SLEEP STUDY)
Polysomnography (sleep study)
This consists of an in-depth analysis of your breathing during sleep by a study. During this process, the following information is recorded:
Brain waves
Blood oxygen level
Heart rate
Breathing rate
Sleep stages
Eye and leg movements
SPECIALIST TO VISIT
Specialist To Visit

If you have been experiencing any signs and symptoms of snoring for an extended period, then it’s time to make an appointment with your doctor. The doctors that can help you include:
Otolaryngologist
Internal medicine specialist
Allergist or Immunologist
Head and neck surgeon (in case of any surgery)


An otolaryngologist, also known as an ENT specialist, is a doctor who specializes in treating and diagnosing disorders related to the ear, throat, and nose.

Internal medicine specialists focus on identifying, preventing, and treating diseases that affect multiple systems in the body.

An immunologist or an allergist specializes in diagnosing, treating, and preventing immune system disorders.


Book an appointment to consult with India's best doctors from the comfort of your home.
Talk to an Expert

PREVENTION OF SNORING
Prevention Of Snoring
1. MAINTAIN A HEALTHY WEIGHT

1. Maintain a healthy weight
Obese people are more prone to snoring and weight loss in such individuals can reduce both snoring and obstructive sleep apnea symptoms.

Explore our exclusive range of weight management products to help you achieve your weight loss goals.
Click Here
2. QUIT SMOKING
2. Quit smoking
Smoking causes inflammation in the airway which can lead to obstructed breathing and decreased airflow, resulting in snoring.

Finding it difficult to quit smoking? Try these tips
Click Here
3. AVOID ALCOHOL BEFORE BEDTIME
3. Avoid alcohol before bedtime
Intake of alcohol, especially at bedtime can relax your throat muscles way too much and predispose to snoring.
4. BE MINDFUL OF USING SEDATIVE MEDICATIONS
4. Be mindful of using sedative medications
Sedatives are a potential risk factor for snoring. Hence, avoid consuming sedatives like zolpidem, clonazepam, and eszopiclone before going to sleep.
5. TREAT ANY ONGOING NASAL CONGESTION
5. Treat any ongoing nasal congestion
Your chances of snoring are higher if your nose is stuffy due to nasal congestion due to a cold or allergy. Treat any ongoing nasal congestion after consulting with your doctor.
6. FOLLOW THESE SIMPLE AND EFFECTIVE TIPS
6. Follow these simple and effective tips
Stick to a proper sleep schedule every night
Try to sleep on your side and not on your back.
Elevate the head of your bed by a few inches.
Do not eat right before bedtime.


Chronic lack of sleep can cause serious and irreversible health ailments. Here are a few simple and effective habits that you can adopt to ensure that you get a sound sleep.
Click to Read

TREATMENT OF SNORING
Treatment Of Snoring

Treatment is based on the cause, severity, and duration of snoring. Depending upon your medical history and present condition, your doctor will suggest suitable treatment options. They may include:
1. LIFESTYLE MODIFICATIONS
1. Lifestyle modifications
Healthy lifestyle changes may improve your health and ease your snoring to a great extent. They include:
Undergoing a weight loss program
Limiting alcohol
Practicing throat exercises
Not sleeping on your back
Using a breathing assistance device


2. MEDICATIONS
2. Medications
Anti-allergics:Treating allergic nasal inflammation can successfully reduce snoring and decrease other symptoms related to poor-quality sleep. Common anti-allergic medicines used to treat nasal allergies include:
Cetirizine
Clemastine
Chlorpheniramine
Decongestants:Examples of decongestants used to remove stuffy noses include:
Naphazoline
Oxymetazoline
Phenylephrine
Adrenaline
Oxymetazoline+Sorbitol
Ordering medication has never been easier. Get guaranteed delivery of all your medications with Tata 1mg.
Upload Prescription

3. ORAL APPLIANCES
3. Oral appliances
Custom-fitted oral appliances or dental mouthpieces can help to advance the position of your jaw, tongue, and soft palate to keep your air passage open.
If you choose to use an oral appliance then dental visits are important at least once every six months to have the fit checked and to assess your oral health.
4. CONTINUOUS POSITIVE AIRWAY PRESSURE (CPAP)DEVICE
4. Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP)device
CPAP is a device that is often used to treat snoring especially when associated with sleep apnea. A CPAP device includes wearing a mask over your nose or mouth while you sleep. It delivers enough air pressure to a mask to keep your upper airway passages open, preventing snoring.
5. UPPER AIRWAY SURGERIES
5. Upper airway surgeries
Various procedures are available to open the upper airway. These include:
Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP):Excess throat tissue is tightened and shortened under general anesthesia.
Maxillomandibular advancement (MMA):It involves moving the upper and lower jaws forward to widen the airway.
Radiofrequency ablation (or somnoplasty):This procedure uses radiofrequency to shrink excess tissue in the soft palate and tongue.
Tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy:These involve removing excess tissue from the back of the throat or nose.
HOME-CARE FOR SNORING
Home-Care For Snoring

You can try these solutions to reduce snoring and get a good night’s sleep:
Apply nasal strips(without medicine) to the bridge of your nose to allow more air into the nostrils.
Invest in a snore-reducing pillow that keeps your head in the proper position when you sleep.
Snoring is very commonly associated with nasal blockages caused due to cold or allergic conditions. To alleviate these, you can try simple and effective home remedies like:
Eucalyptus(Neelgiri) oil:Studies have shown that eucalyptus oil reduces allergic reactions and can provide instant relief from a stuffy nose.
Put a few drops of eucalyptus oil in your steamer and inhale them for a few minutes to ease your nasal congestion.


Check out our range of eucalyptus oils.
Tap Here

Carom(Ajwain):Ajwain oil is known to suppress sneezing and nasal discharge.
Adding a pinch of ajwain seeds to a bowl of hot boiling water and inhaling its steam can reduce your nasal congestion.
Basil (Tulsi):Tulsi or holy basil has a range of health benefits. Consuming a few raw tulsi leaves and honey on an empty stomach can boost immunity and fight conditions like sinus infections, and the common cold.


Read how you can use tulsi leaves to amplify your health.
Click Here

Turmeric(Haldi):Turmeric is a potent anti-inflammatory, antibiotic and antioxidant agent.
Chewing a raw turmeric root on an empty stomach or just drinking turmeric milk can help manage nasal congestion.

Learn more about the health benefits of turmeric.
Read Here
Garlic(Lehsun):It is one of the most powerful natural antibiotics and helps relieve nasal congestion when the cause is an infection or allergy. You can consume a raw garlic clove on an empty stomach every day to see the benefits.
COMPLICATIONS OF SNORING
Complications Of Snoring

Most cases of snoring do not pose any complications and resolve with proper treatment. However, some cases can be associated with the following complications:


1.Sleep apnea:Snoring is often linked with sleep apnea, a disorder in which your upper airway gets blocked many times while you are asleep, reducing or completely stopping the airflow.

Listen to our expert discuss when snoring can be a cause of alarming concern.
Watch This Video

2.Headache:When you don’t sleep properly at night, you may develop a headache which hampers your daily activity and productivity.

Tired of regular headaches? Read about natural remedies to alleviate headaches.
Know More
3. Nocturia:Research shows that individuals who snore may produce more urine. Nocturia is the habit of getting up at night repeatedly to urinate.

4. Irregular heartbeat and Cardiac diseases:Research has proved that those with snoring and sleep apnea are at a greater risk of having an irregular pattern of heartbeat and other cardiac problems.

5.GERD or gastroesophageal reflux disorder:Acid reflux can occur due to unstable breathing during sleep apnea, as a pressure change brings the stomach content up to the food pipe.

6. Mental health issues:Snoring affects your overall mental health. Spending sleepless nights increases the chances ofanxietyanddepression.

7. Stroke:Snoring loudly can be a sign of obstructive sleep apnea that can increase the risk of stroke.

8. Fetal complications:If a woman is pregnant and she snores, it may pose a health risk to the mother as well as the baby. When the mother’s body doesn’t get enough rest during pregnancy, that can affect the health of the fetus within the womb.Did you know?Research has shown that snoring and sleep apnea can be major risk factors for COVID-19 infection.More COVID Info
ALTERNATIVE THERAPIES FOR SNORING
Alternative Therapies for Snoring

The basic aim of alternative therapies is to alleviate snoring and act as an adjunct to general treatment.
1. YOGA
1. Yoga
Practicing yoga can strengthen your lungs and nasal passages over a period of time. Yoga asanas such as Pranayama, Bhramari Pranayama, Kapalbhati, Bhujangasana, and Dhanurasana can help with snoring and can enable better blood circulation to your lungs, throat, and nose.


Planning on starting yoga? Know these dos and don'ts
Tap Here

2. ACUPUNCTURE
2. Acupuncture
Research suggests that acupuncture may be effective at reducing snoring. However, more studies are needed to validate the same. Make sure to talk to your healthcare provider before starting acupuncture.
LIVING WITH SNORING
Living With Snoring

Snoring can be a sore subject for your partners, roommates, and family members. It can cause disrupted sleep not just for you, but for your loved ones as well. Living with snoring is learning the right ways to prevent the condition from aggravating and relieving the symptoms. Here are a few tips that might help:
CHANGE YOUR SLEEPING POSITION
Change your sleeping position
Sleeping on your side allows air to flow easily and can reduce or stop your snoring. This is because while sleeping on your back, your tongue moves to the back of your throat, thus blocking airflow.
FOLLOW SLEEP HYGIENE
Follow sleep hygiene
If you don't sleep enough, you might start snoring because your throat muscles become relaxed and can block your airways.
Sleep for at least 7 hours, and to achieve that follow a sleep routine by sleeping and waking up at the same time every day. This helps a great deal in falling asleep faster and improving the overall quality of sleep.
USE HEAD-ELEVATING AIDS
Use head-elevating aids
Using products such as pillows or bed risers for elevating the head of your bed helps reduce snoring since it keeps the airways open.


Shop Them Here
TRY NASAL STRIPS OR NASAL DILATORS
Try nasal strips or nasal dilators
The internal nasal dilator should be applied to the nose at bedtime, whereas the nasal strip should be applied on the bridge of the nose at bedtime too. Both should be worn the whole night. They have shown good results in reducing snoring.
TRY MOUTH EXERCISES
Try mouth exercises
You may consider oropharyngeal exercises (mouth exercises) to stop snoring. They’ve been found to effectively reduce snoring. Talk to your doctor to understand how they are done.
TIPS TO MANAGE SNORING PARTNERS
Tips to manage snoring partners
To manage a partner’s snoring and get some more sleep, it is important to be patient and find a solution. Also, learning to cope with the problem can take you a long way. Try these:
Let them know they snore
Help them make diet and lifestyle changes
Sleep back-to-back to prevent your partner from rolling onto their back
Understand their snoring triggers
Go to bed before your partner
Use earplugs
Get a white noise machine.Did our information help you?In our relentless endeavour to keep improving our services, you are our eyes. Kindly take out sometime to guide us on how to serve your better.Share your feedbackSubscribe to stay informedSubscribe to our carefully crafted informative emailers by Medical Experts and be the first to get the latest health news, tips and important updates.SubmitDisclaimerTata 1mg's sole intention is to ensure that its consumers get information that is expert-reviewed, accurate and trustworthy. However, the information contained herein should NOT be used as a substitute for the advice of a qualified physician. The information provided here is for informational purposes only. This may not cover all possible side effects, drug interactions or warnings or alerts. Please consult your doctor and discuss all your queries related to any disease or medicine. We intend to support, not replace, the doctor-patient relationship.

--- REFERENCES ---

- Snoring. Johns Hopkins Medicine.  Available online:  (https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/health/conditions-and-diseases/snoring)
- Snoring.National Health Service. Available online:  (https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/snoring/)
- Shukla AD, Jain S, Mishra R, Singh AK. Does 'weight reduction' help all adult snorers? Lung India. 2013 Jan;30(1):16-9.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3644827/)
- Bloom JW, Kaltenborn WT, Quan SF. Risk factors in a general population for snoring. Importance of cigarette smoking and obesity. Chest. 1988;93(4):678-683.  (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/3258226/)
- Snoring and Obstructive Sleep Apnea. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. Updated online 10/10/2019.  (https://edantseva.gov.in/content/snoring-and-obstructive-sleep-apnea-0)
- Types and causes of snoring. Updated online 11/05/2023.  (https://www.news-medical.net/health/Types-and-Causes-of-Snoring.aspx)
- Snoring. British Snoring & Sleep Apnoea Association. Available online:  (https://britishsnoring.co.uk/what_is_snoring.php)
- Causes, Diagnosis & Treatment of Snoring. MSD Manual. Available online:  (https://www.msdmanuals.com/en-in/professional/neurologic-disorders/sleep-and-wakefulness-disorders/snoring)
- Li-Ang Lee,  Jen-Fang Yu, Yu-Lun Lo,  Yen-Sheng Chen,  Ding-Li Wang, Chih-Ming Cho,  Yung-Lun Ni,  Ning-Hung Chen,  Tuan-Jen Fang, Chung-Guei Huang,  and Hsueh-Yu Li.Energy Types of Snoring Sounds in Patients with Obstructive Sleep Apnea Syndrome: A Preliminary Observation. Published online 2012 Dec 31.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3534069/)
- Boris A. Stuck and Benedikt Hofauer. The Diagnosis and Treatment of Snoring in Adults. Published online 2019 Nov 29.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6947688/)
- Nakamura T, Yoshida N, Yamanoi Y, Honryo A, Tomita H, Kuwabara H, Kojima Y. Eucalyptus oil reduces allergic reactions and suppresses mast cell degradation by downregulating IgE-FcεRI signaling. Sci Rep. 2020 Dec 1;10(1):20940.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7708995/)
- Li J, Raghav P, Hu C. Ajwain oil attenuates allergic response of ovalbumin-induced allergic rhinitis via alteration of inflammatory, oxidative stress, and Th1/Th2 responses. J Food Biochem. 2021;45(12):e13963.  (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34708419/ )
- Wu S, Xiao D. Effect of curcumin on nasal symptoms and airflow in patients with perennial allergic rhinitis. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2016;117(6):697-702.e1.  (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27789120/)
- Kinn AC, Harlid R. Snoring as a cause of nocturia in men with lower urinary tract symptoms. Eur Urol. 2003;43(6):696-701.  (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12767373/#)
- Ko J, Baik J, Lee S, Lee S. Intraoral acupuncture treatment for obstructive sleep apnoea with snoring: a case series. Acupunct Med. 2021;39(5):529-532.  (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33583194/ )
- Kumar V, Malhotra V, Kumar S. Application of standardised yoga protocols as the basis of physiotherapy recommendation in treatment of sleep apneas: Moving beyond pranayamas. Indian J Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg [Internet]. 2019 [cited 2023 Dec 28];71(S1):558–65. Available from:  (http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s12070-018-1405-5)
