https://www.1mg.com/diseases/testicular-cancer-300#

TESTICULAR CANCER
Testicular cancerAlso known as Germ cell tumour
OVERVIEW
Overview
Testicular cancer happens when abnormal cells grow in the testicles. The testicles are two small glands in the scrotum, located below the penis. They make sperm and male hormones. Common symptoms of testicular cancer include a lump, swelling, or heaviness in the testicle or scrotum.


Testicular cancer accounts for merely 1% of malignancies found in men. It can occur in men of all ages, but is most commonly seen in men aged 15 to 44 years. It usually affects only one testicle. Risk factors for testicular cancer include undescended testicles, family history, andHIV infection.


Testicular cancer is highly treatable, especially when caught early. Based on the diagnosis and stage, your doctor may recommend surveillance, surgery, radiation, chemotherapy, or a combination of these treatments for the best outcome.
KEY FACTS
Key FactsUsually seen inAdults between 15 to 44 years of ageGender affectedMenBody part(s) involvedTesticlesMimicking ConditionsTesticular torsionEpididymitisHydroceleSpermatoceleNecessary health tests/imaging
Imaging tests:Ultrasound scrotal,CECT scan whole abdomen,Chest X-ray, andCECT scan chest.

Blood tests:Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP),Beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (beta-hCG), andLactate dehydrogenase (LDH).

Surgical removal of the testicle (orchidectomy or orchiectomy)
Treatment
Surgery:Radical inguinal orchiectomy and Retroperitoneal lymph node dissection.

Chemotherapy:Bleomycin,Cisplatin,Etoposide, andIfosfamide.

Radiation therapy

Bone marrow transplantation
Specialists to consultGeneral physicianGeneral surgeonUrologistOncologist
SYMPTOMS OF TESTICULAR CANCER
Symptoms of Testicular Cancer

Testicular cancer can cause several symptoms that affect your health. It is possible to experience more than one symptom at the same time. These include:
Feeling a lump or swelling in either testicleFeeling of heaviness in the scrotumCollection of fluid in the scrotumExperiencing pain or discomfort in one testicle or the scrotumTesticular atrophy (shrinking of the testicles)Experiencing a dull ache in the abdomen or groin regionEnlargement or tenderness of the breastsLowerback painSwelling of one or both legs or shortness of breath due to a blood clotShortness of breath, chest pain, and blood in sputum or phlegm (when cancer has spread to the lungs)Headachesand confusion in case the tumour spreads to the brain.

Quality cancer care isn’t something to leave to chance, and you don’t have to go through it alone. At Tata 1mg, we're here to support you with trusted resources, expert guidance, and everything you need at every step.
Explore Our Platform
TYPES OF TESTICULAR CANCER
Types Of Testicular Cancer

The first step in distinguishing types of testicular cancer often starts with how the tumor cells appear under a microscope. These include:

1. SEMINOMA
1. Seminoma

These tend to grow slowly and usually remain confined to the testicles, making them less likely to spread. Seminomas are more common in older adults.

2. NONSEMINOMA
2. Nonseminoma

This type is usually seen at earlier stages of life. Later, it grows in size and spreads rapidly throughout the body. Nonseminoma tumours tend to involve the lymph nodes. There are different types of non-seminoma tumours, like:
Embryonal carcinomaYolk sac tumourChoriocarcinomaTeratoma

3. STROMAL TUMOURS
3. Stromal tumours

Stromal tumors are rare testicular cancers that arise from the supportive tissues around germ cells and usually have a good outcome with surgery. The two main subtypes are:
Leydig cell tumorsSertoli cell tumors.

CAUSES OF TESTICULAR CANCER
Causes Of Testicular Cancer

The exact cause of testicular cancer remains unclear. Typically, healthy cells grow and divide in a controlled manner to support normal body function, but in some cases, mutations (changes) cause these cells to grow uncontrollably, even when the body doesn't need them.

The cancerous cells pile up, take up space, and use nutrients meant for healthy cells. Over time, they form a lump that can be felt in the testicle.

Some testicular cancers start in cells that create immature sperm. Researchers have found that many of these cancers have an extra copy of chromosome 12. Others show abnormal numbers or structures of chromosomes.

Certain risk factors increase the probability of testicular cancer, which are discussed in detail in the next segment.

RISK FACTORS FOR TESTICULAR CANCER
Risk Factors For Testicular Cancer

The following factors are associated with a high risk of testicular cancer.

NON-MODIFIABLE FACTORS
Non-modifiable factors

Age group of 15 to 44 years
Failure of the testicle to descend from the abdomen into the scrotum (cryptorchidism)
Personal history of testicular cancer
Family history of testicular cancer
Race (Incidence is highest in the white race, most rapidly increasing in the Hispanic population, and lowest amongst African-American individuals)
Abnormal testicular development in conditions like Klinefelter syndrome
Congenital defects like hypospadias (abnormality of the penis) and inguinal hernia (a lump in the groin)

MODIFIABLE FACTORS
Modifiable factors

Infertility or difficulty conceiving a baby
HPV or HIV infection
Issues before birth related to the mother’s pregnancy, such as abnormal bleeding and estrogen or hormone therapy

LIFESTYLE FACTORS
Lifestyle factors

Smoking
Cannabis use
Diet (high consumption of dairy products, red meat, etc)
Exposure to electromagnetic fields
Occupational exposure to plastics and high temperatures.Did You Know?
Smoking can lead to testicular cancer. Studies suggest that smoking increases the risk of developing testicular cancer, particularly non-seminomatous tumors. So what are you waiting for? Quit smoking today to reduce your risk.
Try Smoking Cessation
HOME CARE FOR TESTICULAR CANCER
Home care For Testicular Cancer

It generally takes about two weeks or two months to recover from an orchiectomy that allows doctors to remove the affected testicle. It is important to follow the post-op instructions given by your doctor during your recovery time.

You will be advised to avoid lifting anything over ten pounds for the first few weeks of the surgery.
You will also be asked to refrain from engaging in any kind of sexual activity until you have recovered.
Activities such as exercising, running, or playing sports should be avoided for nearly four weeks post-surgery.
You will be asked to maintain a schedule of follow-up appointments to minimise the risk of testicular cancer returning.
You will be asked to learn how to perform self-testicular examinations.

DIAGNOSIS OF TESTICULAR CANCER
Diagnosis Of Testicular Cancer

Diagnosis of testicular cancer begins with evaluating symptoms and identifying any unusual changes through a medical assessment. It consists of:

1. CLINICAL EXAMINATION
1. Clinical examination

The doctor will examine both testicles to check for lumps or changes
Other areas like the abdomen, neck, chest, armpits, and groin are checked for swollen lymph nodes
Breasts and nipples are examined for any unusual growth
Legs are checked for swelling that could be due to blood clots.



2. IMAGING TESTS
2. Imaging tests

Ultrasound scrotal:A testicular ultrasound uses sound waves to create an image of the scrotum and testicles. It helps determine the size, nature, and location of the lump.
CECT scan whole abdomen:It is usually done to evaluate the abdominal area. The presence, size, and location of a tumour, along with associated lymph nodes, can be evaluated.
Chest X-ray:It is used to ascertain any metastasis (spread) to the lungs.
CECT chest:It should be performed in case of metastasis to the lung or if lung nodules are identified on chest x-ray.


3. BLOOD TESTS
3. Blood tests

Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP):It is a protein that may be found in higher levels in the blood if certain types of testicular cancer are present.
Beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (beta-hCG):It is a hormone that may be elevated in the blood with some types of testicular cancer, helping in diagnosis and monitoring.
Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH):It is an enzyme that may rise in testicular cancer, indicating tumor burden and helping track disease progression.

Getting your tests done has never been easier. Tata 1mg gives you trusted, accurate results with top-quality labs.
Book Your Test Now


4. SURGICAL REMOVAL OF THE TESTICLE (ORCHIDECTOMY OR ORCHIECTOMY)
4. Surgical removal of the testicle (orchidectomy or orchiectomy)

In testicular cancer, the affected testicle is usually removed through surgery and then examined in a lab.
This procedure helps confirm the diagnosis, and typically, only one testicle is removed since both are rarely affected at the same time.
Unlike other cancers, a biopsy isn't done directly from the testicle because it may increase the risk of cancer spreading to nearby lymph nodes.


Cancer diagnosis can be overwhelming and challenging, and it’s important to have clarity before making decisions. Tata 1mg has partnered with Navya to offer online second opinions, bringing you peace of mind.
Get A Second Opinion



PREVENTION OF TESTICULAR CANCER
Prevention Of Testicular Cancer

There’s no known way to prevent testicular cancer yet. Healthy lifestyle habits like eating a balanced diet, staying active, avoiding tobacco, and limiting alcohol may help lower your risk of developing cancer.

But catching it early can stop it from spreading and improve outcomes. Doing a testicular self-exam (TSE) can help spot changes early. Learn more:

TESTICULAR SELF-EXAM (TSE)
Testicular self-exam (TSE)
Start in your teens and do it once a month, ideally after a warm bath or shower when the scrotal skin is relaxed.

How to perform?
Stand upright during the exam
Look for any swelling in the scrotum
Gently feel the scrotal sac to locate each testicle
Check one testicle at a time by gently rolling it between your thumb and fingers to feel for lumps or changes.

Not sure how to do a testicular self-exam? Don’t worry, our expert’s got you covered.
Watch This Video



SPECIALIST TO VISIT
Specialist To Visit

Testicular cancer requires a comprehensive approach for the best outcomes. Experts who may be involved include:
General physicianUrologistOncologistRadiation oncologistFertility specialist

Ageneral physicianidentifies early symptoms and refers you to a specialist for further evaluation.

Aurologistdiagnoses and performs surgery to remove the affected testicle.

Anoncologistplans and manages chemotherapy or targeted cancer treatments.

Aradiation oncologistdelivers radiation therapy to shrink or destroy cancer cells.

Afertility specialist offers options to preserve fertility before treatment begins.

If you notice a lump, swelling, or any unusual change in the size of your testicle, it’s important to get professional help without delay.
Consult An Expert

TREATMENT OF TESTICULAR CANCER
Treatment Of Testicular Cancer

Testicular cancer can be treated based on the type and staging of the cancer. The staging of testicular cancer is based upon understanding the pattern of spread. One staging classification that is used is the TNM system:
Stage I:Tumour (T) is limited to the testisStage II:Tumour has spread to the lymph nodes (N) in the back of the abdomen (retroperitoneum)Stage III:Metastasis (M) of the cancer has spread to other parts of the body, such as the lungs, liver, brain, and bone.

Note: For testicular cancer, an S is also added to the TNM system. Serum tumour marker (S) indicates any elevation of serum tumour markers like AFP, beta-hCG, and LDH.

Management consists of:

1. SURGERY
1. Surgery
Radical inguinal orchiectomy:The surgeon makes a small cut in the groin to remove the affected testicle. In early stages, this surgery alone may be enough to treat the cancer.
Retroperitoneal lymph node dissection:This surgery removes lymph nodes through a cut in the abdomen.

2. CHEMOTHERAPY
2. Chemotherapy

Chemotherapy treatment is a treatment modality that uses strong medicines that are effective in killing cancer cells. Commonly used chemotherapeutic agents in the treatment of testicular cancer are:
BleomycinCisplatinEtoposideIfosfamide

Need meds? Tata 1mg has you covered — from everyday essentials to specialty prescriptions, all delivered to your doorstep with ease and care.
Order Now

3. RADIATION THERAPY
3. Radiation therapy

Radiation therapy is a treatment modality that uses high-powered energy beams that work as an effective treatment to kill cancer cells.

Radiation therapy is often recommended for patients who have the seminoma type of testicular cancer and can also be recommended after surgery to remove a testicle.


4. BONE MARROW TRANSPLANTATION
4. Bone marrow transplantation

In this procedure, the bone marrow is taken from the patient and treated with drugs to do away with the cancer cells. The marrow is then frozen.

The patient is given high-dose chemotherapy with or without radiation therapy to destroy the remaining marrow.

The marrow earlier removed from the patient is thawed or warmed and injected into a vein of the patient to replace the marrow that was destroyed.
Did You Know?
Curcumin, found in turmeric, may help fight testicular cancer by reducing inflammation and slowing the growth of cancer cells. It is important to note that it should not replace the conventional treatment.Buy Turmeric Products Here
COMPLICATIONS OF TESTICULAR CANCER
Complications Of Testicular Cancer

Testicular cancer can lead to certain complications such as:

1. Excessive female hormones:Some types of testicular cancer make extra hormones like hCG or estrogen. This can cause men to develop enlarged breast tissue, a condition called gynecomastia.

2. Metastasis (cancer spread):If testicular cancer is not treated, it can spread to other body parts. This may cause symptoms like back pain, swollen lymph nodes, or breathing problems if the lungs are involved.

3. Long-term chemotherapy effects:Certain chemo medicines can increase the risk of heart problems,hypertension (high blood pressure), and cholesterol. In rare cases, another type of cancer, like leukemia, can appear years after treatment.

ALTERNATIVE THERAPIES FOR TESTICULAR CANCER
Alternative Therapies For Testicular Cancer

Testicular cancer needs standard medical treatment, but some alternative therapies can ease side effects. These include:


1. ACUPUNCTURE
1. Acupuncture

Acupuncture has proven to be a successful alternative therapy for individuals with testicular pain. It involves the insertion of needles through the skin at specific points on the body. Acupuncture can also provide relief for people who have epididymitis (inflammation of the epididymis present at the back of the testicle).


2. AROMATHERAPY
2. Aromatherapy

Aromatherapy uses a mix of essential oils for massages that can make a person feel relaxed. Often, people feel that alternative therapies such as aromatherapy help them cope with the treatment of cancer and allow them to feel relaxed.



LIVING WITH TESTICULAR CANCER
Living With Testicular Cancer

Living with testicular cancer can be overwhelming, both physically and emotionally. But with timely diagnosis and the right support, it’s possible to maintain a good quality of life. Tips that could help include:

1. LEARN ABOUT TESTICULAR CANCER
1. Learn about testicular cancer

Learning about testicular cancer can help you make comfortable decisions regarding your treatment choice
It is better to empower yourself with the knowledge of what’s about to happen than to fear the unknown

2. TAKE CARE OF YOURSELF
2. Take care of yourself

Eat a healthy, well-balanced diet
Increase the number of fruits and vegetables you intake and get plenty of rest every night
Try to practice meditation and eliminate sources of stress from your life before the treatment.
Talk to your doctor about strategies that can help your body prepare for the treatment

3. PRIORITIZE MENTAL AND EMOTIONAL WELL-BEING
3. Prioritize mental and emotional well-being

Talk openly about your diagnosis and feelings
Lean on close friends and family for support
Gather information to understand your treatment better
Acknowledge physical changes and limitations
Communicate with your partner about intimacy
Addressing practical issues like finances, work, etc.

4. MANAGE THE COST OF CANCER CARE
4. Manage the cost of cancer care

Cancer treatment can be costly and sometimes overwhelming
Besides medical bills, unexpected expenses may arise
Financial stress can interrupt treatment if not addressed early
Reach out to a hospital social worker—they can guide you on grants, insurance claims, and available aid.

TIPS FOR CAREGIVERS
Tips for Caregivers

Offer emotional support and encouragement
Learn about the treatment plan
Help manage symptoms and side effects
Keep track of doctor visits and medications
Support with hygiene and daily tasks
Speak with empathy and maintain a positive outlook
Pitch in with chores and daily routines
Assist with insurance and financial paperwork.

No one should face cancer alone. At Tata 1mg, we’re here to walk with you, offering trusted care, expert support, and the resources you need at every step of the journey.
Explore Cancer Care Platform
Did our information help you?In our relentless endeavour to keep improving our services, you are our eyes. Kindly take out sometime to guide us on how to serve your better.Share your feedbackSubscribe to stay informedSubscribe to our carefully crafted informative emailers by Medical Experts and be the first to get the latest health news, tips and important updates.SubmitDisclaimerTata 1mg's sole intention is to ensure that its consumers get information that is expert-reviewed, accurate and trustworthy. However, the information contained herein should NOT be used as a substitute for the advice of a qualified physician. The information provided here is for informational purposes only. This may not cover all possible side effects, drug interactions or warnings or alerts. Please consult your doctor and discuss all your queries related to any disease or medicine. We intend to support, not replace, the doctor-patient relationship.

--- REFERENCES ---

- Testicular self-examination (TSE). Urology Care Foundation. Accessed Dec. 12, 2016.  (https://www.urologyhealth.org/urology-a-z/t/testicular-cancer)
- Gaddam SJ, Bicer F, Chesnut GT. Testicular Cancer. [Updated 2023 May 27]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2025 Jan-. Available from:  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK563159/)
- Testicular Cancer. National Cancer Institute. Available from:  (https://www.cancer.gov/types/testicular)
- Cancer Council Australia. Testicular Cancer. Cancer Council Australia, Available from:  (https://www.cancer.org.au/cancer-information/types-of-cancer/testicular-cancer.)
- American Academy of Family Physicians. Common anorectal conditions: Part II. Lesions. Am Fam Physician [Internet]. 2018 Feb 15 [cited 2025 Mar 21];97(4):261-8. Available from:  (https://www.aafp.org/pubs/afp/issues/2018/0215/p261.html)
- Hanna N, Timmerman R, Foster RS, et al. Clinical Presentation. In: Kufe DW, Pollock RE, Weichselbaum RR, et al., editors. Holland-Frei Cancer Medicine. 6th edition. Hamilton (ON): BC Decker; 2003. Available from:  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK13181/)
- Johns Hopkins Medicine. Types of Testicular Cancer [Internet]. Baltimore (MD): Johns Hopkins Medicine; [cited 2025 Apr 17]. Available from  (https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/health/conditions-and-diseases/testicular-cancer/types-of-testicular-cancer)
- Rosenberg C, Van Gurp RJ, Geelen E, Oosterhuis JW, Looijenga LH. Overrepresentation of the short arm of chromosome 12 is related to invasive growth of human testicular seminomas and nonseminomas. Oncogene. 2000 Nov 30;19(51):5858-62. Available from:  (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11127816/)
- Yazici S, Del Biondo D, Napodano G, Grillo M, Calace FP, Prezioso D, Crocetto F, Barone B. Risk Factors for Testicular Cancer: Environment, Genes and Infections-Is It All? Medicina (Kaunas). 2023 Apr 7;59(4):724. Available from  (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10145700/)
- Rezaei M, Shahbazi R, Hashemi M, et al. Ameliorating Effects of Curcumin on Testicular Cancer. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2023;2023:4558299. Available from  (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1155/2023/4558299)
- Wang J, Han L, Bao B, Yu X, Zhang K, Dai H, Li X, Wang B, Li H. The safety and efficacy of acupuncture for epididymitis protocol for a systematic review. Medicine (Baltimore). 2019 Jan;98(1):e13934. Available from:  (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6344197/#)
- Sartorius CA, Hess-Wilson JK. Steroid hormone receptors and prostate cancer: mechanisms of androgen and estrogen receptor cross-talk. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2007;281(1-2):1-12. Available from:  (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S1744388117305868)
