https://www.1mg.com/diseases/tuberculosis-tb-256#

TUBERCULOSIS (TB)
Tuberculosis (TB)Also known as TB, and Koch's disease
OVERVIEW
Overview
Tuberculosis (TB) is an infectious disease caused by the bacterium Mycobacterium tuberculosis, primarily affecting the lungs, but it can also affect other systems. It spreads through airborne droplets when an infected person coughs or sneezes.

Tuberculosis symptoms include a persistentcough(often with blood), chest pain,fever,night sweats, unexplained weight loss, and fatigue. Men are more affected by tuberculosis than women, with higher infection rates and mortality worldwide. Weakened immunity (HIV,diabetes, malnutrition), close contact with an infected person, smoking, and living in crowded or unsanitary conditions increase the risk of TB.

Tuberculosis treatment comprises a combination of drugs and may continue for a long period to eliminate bacteria and to avoid resistance against antibiotics used. Most patients recover completely from the disease. However, vulnerable patients, such as HIV-affected individuals or those with lower immunity, suffer from a severe type of disease.

In 2019, an estimated 10 million people suffered from tuberculosis, of which 2.6 million were Indians. Although the cases of TB in India are high, the Government provides support to all TB patients with programs such as NTEP, DOTS, and Nikshay patrika, which are aimed at improving treatment with free medicines and support.
KEY FACTS
Key FactsUsually seen inAll age groupsGender affectedBoth men and women but more common in menBody part(s) involvedLungsIntestineBonesBrainBloodPrevalenceWorldwide: 10 Million (2019)India: 2.64 Million (2019)Mimicking ConditionsPneumoniaLung cancerFungal infection of the lungSarcoidosisNecessary health tests/imagingBlood tests:Cartridge-based nucleic acid amplification test (CB-NAAT),TB platinum interferon gamma release assay,Complete blood count,Erythrocyte sedimentation rate, andHIV 1 And 2 antibody.Sputum analysis:AFB (ZN Stain), sputum, and Mycobacterium tuberculosis DNA PCR - Qualitative -Sputum.Skin prick test (Mantoux test).Imaging studies:Chest X-ray,HRCT scan,X-ray dorsal spineandMRI brain.TreatmentAntituberculosis medications:Isoniazid,Rifampicin,Pyrazinamide,Ethambutol,Amikacin,Levofloxacin,Moxifloxacin,Para-amino salicylic acid,Clofazimine,Imipenem,Clarithromycin, andBedaquiline.Analgesic:ParacetamolAntitussive:Dextromethorphan hydrobromideVitamin B supplementsAntacid:OmeprazoleMedicines to reduce uric acid levels:AllopurinolandFebuxostat.Specialists to consultGeneral physician
Infectious disease specialist
PulmonologistRelated NGOsInternational Union Against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease. The UnionTB AlertStop TB PartnershipGLRA. IndiaSee All
SYMPTOMS OF TUBERCULOSIS
Symptoms Of Tuberculosis


Pulmonary tuberculosis or TB of the lungs is the most common type of TB. Other types such as TB of the bones, lymph nodes, brain, kidneys, intestine, and genitals are also seen. Symptoms of Pulmonary TB include:
Coughthat lasts for more than 2 weeks with or without feverFever,especially an evening rise in body temperaturePresence of blood in the sputumChest painLoss of appetiteLoss of weightTirednessNight sweats and chills


Breathe easier and protect your lungs. Explore trusted respiratory care products to give your lungs the care they deserve.
Shop Now

SYMPTOMS OF TB OTHER THAN PULMONARY TB
Symptoms of TB other than pulmonary TB
Occasionally, tuberculosis may also affect other organs, such as bones, stomach, etc., and presents with common symptoms like fever, weight and appetite loss and some specific symptoms related to the organ system involved like:
Bone TB involving the spine can causeback painand neurological complications like paraplegia where the lower limbs become paralyzed.
Gastrointestinal system disease can causenausea,vomiting, diarrhea, malabsorption, etc.
Tuberculosis of the kidneys can cause blood in the urine.
Infection involving the brain and its covering membrane can cause seizures,headaches, neurological abnormalities, etc.
TYPES OF TUBERCULOSIS
Types Of Tuberculosis


There are 5 different types of tuberculosis based on the type of infection. These include:
1. LATENT TUBERCULOSIS
1. Latent tuberculosis
In latent tuberculosis, the person carries the bacteria but does not develop any symptoms.
However, there is a possibility that the latent infection may reactivate at a later stage in life when the body’s immune defenses go down and may lead to active disease.


2. ACTIVE TUBERCULOSIS
2. Active tuberculosis
Active tuberculosis refers to a condition where the bacteria are in an active stage and cause symptoms.
Active tuberculosis can be further classified into pulmonary and systemic tuberculosis.
Although tuberculosis is primarily a disease of the lungs (pulmonary TB), it may affect other organs in the body, such as bones, lymph nodes, brain, kidneys, intestine, and reproductive system.
When active tuberculosis is present in other body parts, it is known as systemic tuberculosis.


3. DISSEMINATED TUBERCULOSIS
3. Disseminated tuberculosis
Also known as miliary tuberculosis, this is a severe type of infection where the tuberculosis bacteria spread to the entire body through the bloodstream.


4. MULTIDRUG RESISTANT TUBERCULOSIS (MDR TB)
4. Multidrug resistant tuberculosis (MDR TB)
This type of tuberculosis is caused by a bacteria that is resistant to at least two most common and potent drugs used to treat TB namely isoniazid and rifampin.


5. EXTENSIVELY DRUG-RESISTANT TUBERCULOSIS (XDR TB)
5. Extensively drug-resistant tuberculosis (XDR TB)
This is a rare type of tuberculosis in which the bacteria is resistant to more than two drugs used to treat TB.
In addition to isoniazid and rifampin, people suffering from XDR TB are resistant to fluoroquinolones (an antibacterial medicine) and at least one of three injectable second-line drugs used to treat bacteria.

Want to know everything about TB causes symptoms & treatment (in Hindi)?
Watch This Video To Know More



CAUSES OF TUBERCULOSIS
Causes Of Tuberculosis


Tuberculosis is caused by a bacterium called Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
TB usually spreads from one person to the other through the air.
When a person suffering from TB sneezes, coughs, or spits, the bacteria gets into the air. Hence, when a person inhales even a few of these bacteria from the air, he/she becomes infected.
Although it is contagious, the bacteria grows at a slow rate and requires you to spend considerable time around the person who is sick.
This means it requires close and prolonged contact with a person who has active tuberculosis.

Note:Tuberculosis cannot spread through a simple handshake or sharing utensils as the bacteria cannot survive for long outside of the human body.
Did you know?
Vitamin A deficiency is tied to increased chances of tuberculosis. A study suggested that people who were vitamin A deficient were at an increased risk of contracting tuberculosis from those already infected with the disease.

Check out our vitamins and supplements range to fill up your nutritional quota.Explore now
RISK FACTORS OF TUBERCULOSIS
Risk Factors Of Tuberculosis


Although all age groups are at risk of TB, the risk is higher in people who:
1. ENVIRONMENTAL AND EXPOSURE FACTORS
1. Environmental and exposure factors
Living in or travelling to countries with high TB prevalence (e.g., tropical and developing countries).
Working in crowded places with high exposure risk (hospitals, community centres, prisons, etc.).


2. NUTRITIONAL AND LIFESTYLE FACTORS
2. Nutritional and lifestyle factors
Malnourishment, as undernourished individuals are more at risk.
Excessive alcohol consumption and smoking weaken lung health and immunity.


Quit smoking today to protect your lungs and reduce your risk of tuberculosis for a healthier future.
Try Smoking Cessation Range

3. MEDICAL AND IMMUNITY-RELATED FACTORS
3. Medical and immunity-related factors
Diabetesor long-term use of steroids and anti-cancer drugs.
Weakened immunity due to illness or recovery from a severe condition.
HIV infection, which significantly increases TB susceptibility.Did you know?
Men have a 53% higher risk of tuberculosis than women, but they are less likely to develop extrapulmonary TB (such as abdominal or bone/joint TB). Additionally, the risk of TB-HIV coinfection is lower in males, especially in younger age groups.
DIAGNOSIS OF TUBERCULOSIS
Diagnosis Of Tuberculosis


Along with a detailed history and physical examination, the following tests are used to confirm a diagnosis of tuberculosis:
1. BLOOD TESTS
1. Blood Tests
Cartridge-based nucleic acid amplification test (CB-NAAT):It is a rapid molecular test that helps to detect TB. It not only identifies the bacteria responsible for TB but also helps to find rifampicin-resistant bacteria.
TB platinum interferon-gamma release assay:It is used to check for the body’s immune response to the tuberculosis bacteria.
Other tests:Such asComplete blood count, andErythrocyte sedimentation rateare performed to evaluate the body’s response to infection.
HIV 1 And 2 antibody:As tuberculosis is highly associated with HIV, doctors usually check for the likelihood of HIV exposure when tuberculosis is suspected.


2. SPUTUM ANALYSIS
2. Sputum analysis
Sputum samples are analyzed using tests likeAFB (ZN Stain), sputum, and Mycobacterium tuberculosis DNA PCR - Qualitative -Sputum.
These tests help to check for the presence of tuberculosis bacteria in the sputum.
A positive test confirms the diagnosis.


3. SKIN PRICK TEST
3. Skin prick test
This is also known as theMantoux test.
This screening test helps assess your risk of TB infection or the likelihood of disease progression if already infected.
A small amount of tuberculin is injected into your skin, and if swelling or a reaction appears within 48-72 hours, it indicates possible TB exposure.
However, recent TB vaccination may sometimes cause false-positive results.


4. IMAGING STUDIES
4. Imaging studies
Chest X-rayandHRCT scan(High-resolution computed tomography): Help assess lung damage and detect signs of pulmonary tuberculosis.
X-ray dorsal spineandMRI brain: Aid in diagnosing extrapulmonary TB by identifying infections in the spine, brain, or other organs.

Get accurate and reliable lab tests with Tata 1mg—trusted diagnostics for your health and peace of mind.
Book Your Test Now
PREVENTION OF TUBERCULOSIS
Prevention Of Tuberculosis


Here are key strategies to prevent tuberculosis and stop its spread:
GET VACCINATED
Get vaccinated
The BCG vaccine helps protect against severe forms of TB, especially in children.


MAINTAIN GOOD VENTILATION
Maintain good ventilation
Ensure proper airflow in living spaces to reduce the spread of airborne TB bacteria.


WEAR A MASK
Wear a mask
People without TB can benefit by wearing a mask in high-risk areas to reduce exposure. While individuals with TB should wear a mask to prevent transmitting the infection to others.

An N95 mask provides superior protection by filtering airborne TB bacteria, reducing the risk of inhaling infectious particles.
Buy Here

PRACTICE GOOD HYGIENE
Practice good hygiene
Cover your mouth while coughing or sneezing and dispose of tissues properly.


LIMIT CLOSE CONTACT
Limit close contact
Avoid prolonged exposure to individuals with active TB, especially in enclosed spaces.


STRENGTHEN IMMUNITY
Strengthen immunity
Maintain a healthy diet, avoid smoking and excessive alcohol, and manage chronic conditions like diabetes.

A good immune system can be your shield for protection against many infections. Explore our widest range of immunity enhancers to upgrade your immunity.
Check Them Out Now

Note:Timely testing and treatment can help prevent TB from spreading.
SPECIALIST TO VISIT
Specialist To Visit


If you have symptoms, such as prolonged cough, bloody sputum, fever, or unexplained weight loss, you must seek prompt medical care. The specialist doctors who can diagnose and treat tuberculosis are:General physicianChest physicianInfectious disease specialistPulmonologist


Ageneral physicianidentifies TB symptoms early and refers for specialized diagnosis and treatment.

Achest physiciandiagnoses and manages lung-related TB complications, ensuring proper respiratory care.

Aninfectious disease specialistprovides expert treatment for TB, especially drug-resistant and complex cases.

Apulmonologistfocuses on lung health, helping manage and treat pulmonary TB effectively.

Consult India's best doctors online with a single click.
Book Your Appointment

TREATMENT OF TUBERCULOSIS
Treatment Of Tuberculosis


The treatment for tuberculosis depends on the type of infection. It includes:
FOR LATENT TUBERCULOSIS
For latent tuberculosis
In India, if you have tested positive for tuberculosis in a screening test, treatment may be recommended only if you belong to the high-risk category.
The medicines for latent tuberculosis must be taken for a duration of 6 to 9 months as prescribed by a doctor.

FOR ACTIVE TUBERCULOSIS
For active tuberculosis
Antibiotics are the main treatment options for people suffering from TB. These medicines are usually given in combination as part of a regimen to effectively treat tuberculosis. These medicines kill the bacteria causing tuberculosis or prevent its growth.

The first line of treatment for active tuberculosis consists of combination therapy with five antitubercular drugs. These include:StreptomycinIsoniazidRifampicinPyrazinamideEthambutol

Easy-to-use combination kits, containing a combination of the first-line antitubercular drugs are also readily available.

The treatment continues for 6-8 months even if the symptoms get better, as it ensures complete recovery and prevents the development of drug resistance.

Note:The DOTS regimen (Directly Observed Therapy - Short Term) is followed in India, where the patient has to take the medicine in front of a DOTS agent. This is to ensure adherence to the treatment.

FOR MDR TB AND XDR TB
For MDR TB and XDR TB

The tuberculosis bacteria are prone to develop drug resistance.
Treatment options for MDR and XDR tuberculosis consist of higher dosing of the first line of drugs and a combination of other oral medicines and injections. The course of the treatment is usually 18 months for MDR-TB and 24 months for XDR-TB.

Some of the common examples include:AmikacininjectionsStreptomycininjectionsLevofloxacinpreparationsMoxifloxacinpreparationsPara-amino salicylic acidClofaziminepreparationsImipeneminjectionsClarithromycinpreparationsBedaquiline

SUPPORTIVE CARE
Supportive care
Anti-fever and analgesics likeparacetamolmedicines to provide relief from fever and pain.
Antitussive medications likedextromethorphan hydrobromideto help reduce cough.
Vitamin B supplements are given along with tuberculosis medication to help combat neurological side effects like nerve pain and neuropathies
Antacids likeomeprazoleto prevent gastrointestinal symptoms
Medicines to reduce uric acid levels (hyperuricemia is known to be a side-effect of TB medicines) such asallopurinolandfebuxostatare recommended.

Get your medications from India’s largest and most trusted online pharmacy.
Upload Your Prescription

HOME CARE FOR TUBERCULOSIS
Home Care For Tuberculosis


Herbal remedies can relieve cough, a common TB symptom. However, they do not cure TB. It is important to stick to your prescribed treatment for proper care. Effective home remedies include:

Ginger(Adrak): It contains anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties that can help soothe the throat, reduce irritation, and relieve cough.

Turmeric (Haldi):It has curcumin, which acts as an anti-inflammatory and antibacterial agent, helping to calm cough and respiratory irritation.
Buy Turmeric Products

Cinnamon(Dalchini):It contains compounds that can help relax the airways, reduce inflammation, and ease coughing.

Other things to consider to care for yourself or others at home with active tuberculosis:
Always use a handkerchief to cover your mouth and nose while sneezing or coughing.
Wash your hands frequently with soap and water or use hand sanitizers.
Take a balanced diet rich in vitamins and minerals.
Drink plenty of fluids throughout the day.
Take plenty of rest. Do not engage in any strenuous activities.
Take the entire course of medicines prescribed by the doctor, even if your symptoms reduce or you start feeling better.

There are many myths about TB, such as the misconception that it's a genetic disease. Learn the facts and separate truth from fiction.
Read This Article

COMPLICATIONS OF TUBERCULOSIS
Complications Of Tuberculosis


Most patients recover completely from tuberculosis. However, it may cause serious complications, especially in HIV patients and those who suffer from immunocompromised states. Leaving tuberculosis untreated may further lead to:

Miliary tuberculosis or disseminated tuberculosis where the infection spreads widely throughout the body, affecting multiple organs
Pleural effusion, pneumothorax, and empyema which is an accumulation of fluids, air, or pus, respectively, in the lungs
Acute respiratory distress syndrome or fluid build-up in the lungs
Paraplegia or paralysis of the lower body due to tuberculosis of the spine
Tuberculous arthritis of hips or knees
Male infertilityandfemale infertility, in TB of reproductive organs
Seizures and growth retardation, in TB of the brain
MDR TB and XDR TB
ALTERNATIVE THERAPIES FOR TUBERCULOSIS
Alternative Therapies For Tuberculosis


There is a limited role of alternative therapies in the management of tuberculosis. One of the alternate therapy that can help manage the symptoms of TB is:

CHEST PHYSIOTHERAPY
Chest physiotherapy
It may help with the removal of secretions from the lung and improve lung function.
It uses different types of breathing exercises.
It also includes postural drainage, advising patients to sleep in different positions such as sleeping on the back with their head down.
These positions are believed to help in the removal of secretions in the lung with the help of gravity.

Note:It is important to understand this is an adjunct to the conventional treatment and more research is required to understand its efficacy.

LIVING WITH TUBERCULOSIS
Living With Tuberculosis


Tuberculosis is a disease that is often associated with a stigma as there are many misconceptions surrounding it. However, with recent improvements in available treatments and public awareness campaigns, the stigma of the disease is declining, and more and more people are recovering completely from the disease.

Here are a few tips you need to keep in mind if you are on medications for tuberculosis:


MAINTAIN A ROUTINE
Maintain a routine
If you are taking medications by yourself, take them at the same time every day, marking off the date on a calendar or using a weekly pill dispenser.


BE AWARE OF NEW SYMPTOMS
Be aware of new symptoms
Inform your doctor if you experience any unusual symptoms or side effects of the medications. Your doctor might consider changing the drugs.


COMPLETE YOUR COURSE OF MEDICATIONS
Complete your course of medications
Not finishing the course or stopping the medications mid-way can not only increase the risk of getting sick and spreading the infection again but can also make the bacteria resistant to the drugs.


GET ALL THE SUPPORT
Get all the support
Medicines free of cost are available for all TB patients at Government hospitals.
The latest guidelines, information, and programs about TB can be easily accessed through Nikshay Patrika, a quarterly newsletter by the Central Tuberculosis Division.
DOTS treatment is free of cost which helps prevent failure of the treatment and lowers the risk of MDR-TB by ensuring strict adherence and uninterrupted treatment for TB.
Other forms of TB don’t spread through close contact. Support individuals with TB instead of isolating them.
Reach out to NGOs and community support groups related to TB which can help you support both physically, emotionally, and financially.Did our information help you?In our relentless endeavour to keep improving our services, you are our eyes. Kindly take out sometime to guide us on how to serve your better.Share your feedbackSubscribe to stay informedSubscribe to our carefully crafted informative emailers by Medical Experts and be the first to get the latest health news, tips and important updates.SubmitDisclaimerTata 1mg's sole intention is to ensure that its consumers get information that is expert-reviewed, accurate and trustworthy. However, the information contained herein should NOT be used as a substitute for the advice of a qualified physician. The information provided here is for informational purposes only. This may not cover all possible side effects, drug interactions or warnings or alerts. Please consult your doctor and discuss all your queries related to any disease or medicine. We intend to support, not replace, the doctor-patient relationship.

--- REFERENCES ---

- Barberis I, Bragazzi NL, Galluzzo L, Martini M. The history of tuberculosis: from the first historical records to the isolation of Koch's bacillus. J Prev Med Hyg. 2017;58(1):E9-E12.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5432783/)
- Tuberculosis. World Health Organisation.  (https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/tuberculosis)
- Tuberculosis. Centres for Disease Control.  (https://www.cdc.gov/tb/about/?CDC_AAref_Val=https://www.cdc.gov/tb/topic/basics/default.htm)
- Tuberculosis. Harvard Health Publishing.  (https://www.health.harvard.edu/a_to_z/tuberculosis-a-to-z)
- Humayun M, Chirenda J, Ye W, Mukeredzi I, Mujuru HA, Yang Z. Effect of Gender on Clinical Presentation of Tuberculosis (TB) and Age-Specific Risk of TB, and TB-Human Immunodeficiency Virus Coinfection. Open Forum Infect Dis. 2022 Oct 5;9(10):ofac512. Available from:  (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9620549/ )
- Kowalska J, Tyburski J, Matysiak K, Jakubowska M, Łukaszyk J, Krzymińska J. Cinnamon as a Useful Preventive Substance for the Care of Human and Plant Health. Molecules. 2021 Aug 31;26(17):5299. Available from:  (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8433798/ )
- Diagnostic Standards and Classification of Tuberculosis in Adults and Children. This official statement of the American Thoracic Society and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention was adopted by the ATS Board of Directors, July 1999. This statement was endorsed by the Council of the Infectious Disease Society of America, September 1999. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2000 Apr;161(4 Pt 1):1376-95.  (https://www.atsjournals.org/doi/full/10.1164/ajrccm.161.4.16141)
- Adigun R, Singh R. Tuberculosis. [Updated 2020 Oct 27]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2021 Jan-.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK441916/)
- Zaman K. Tuberculosis: a global health problem. J Health Popul Nutr. 2010 Apr;28(2):111-3.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2980871/)
- Institute of Medicine (US). Facing the Reality of Drug-Resistant Tuberculosis in India: Challenges and Potential Solutions: Summary of a Joint Workshop by the Institute of Medicine, the Indian National Science Academy, and the Indian Council of Medical Research. Washington (DC): National Academies Press (US); 2012. 2, Drug-Resistant TB in India.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK100386/)
- Zhou X, Afzal S, Wohlmuth H, Münch G, Leach D, Low M, Li CG. Synergistic Anti-Inflammatory Activity of Ginger and Turmeric Extracts in Inhibiting Lipopolysaccharide and Interferon-γ-Induced Proinflammatory Mediators. Molecules. 2022 Jun 16;27(12):3877. Available from:  (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9229778/ )
- Shrinivasan R, Rane S, Pai M. India's syndemic of tuberculosis and COVID-19. BMJ Glob Health. 2020;5(11).  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7670552/)
- Nikshay Patrika. Inaugural Issue. Jan-Mar 2018. Volume 01. Quarterly Publication of Central TB Division. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. Government Of India.  (https://tbcindia.gov.in/showfile.php?lid=3310)
- Wanjari MK, Lalwani L, Tiwari PR. Novelty of Physiotherapy Protocols in a Classic Case of Extrapulmonary Tuberculosis in a 35-Year-Old Male Patient: A Case Report. Cureus. 2024 Apr 3;16(4):e57495. Available from  (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11066610/ )
- German Leprosy and TB Relief Association (GLRA) India. Our work: TB [Internet]. [cited 2025 Feb 7]. Available from:  (https://www.glraindia.org/our-work/tb)
- Stop TB Partnership. Home [Internet]. [cited 2025 Feb 7]. Available from:  (https://www.stoptb.org/)
- TB Alert. Home [Internet]. [cited 2025 Feb 7]. Available from:  (https://www.tbalert.org/)
- The Union. Home [Internet]. [cited 2025 Feb 7]. Available from:  (https://theunion.org/)
