https://www.1mg.com/diseases/vitamin-k-deficiency-890#

VITAMIN K DEFICIENCY
Vitamin K deficiencyAlso known as phylloquinone deficiency and hemorrhagic disease of the newborn
OVERVIEW
Overview

Vitamin K is a fat-soluble vitamin that helps to make various proteins needed for blood clotting and bone-building. Uncontrolled bleeding is the main symptom of Vitamin K deficiency.

The other symptoms include easy bruising, heavy and painful menstruation, bleeding from gums and teeth, sleepiness, vomiting, nose bleeds, jaundice, and pale skin.

Infants are at higher risk of this deficiency due to poor transfer of Vitamin K from the placenta, less content in breast milk, immature gut bacteria, and underdeveloped intestine needed for its absorption. Inadequate dietary intake, the presence of some gastrointestinal disorders, and the use of certain medications also increase its risk.

Treatment includes addressing underlying causes and correcting the deficiency through diet and supplementation.
KEY FACTS
Key FactsUsually seen inAll age groups but more common in newbornsGender affectedBoth men and womenBody part(s) involvedBloodBrainHeartSkinDigestive systemGastrointestinal tractMimicking Conditions
Factor deficiencies
Hemorrhagic diseaseNecessary health tests/imagingLaboratory tests:Coagulation profile,Prothrombin time (PT) test,Complete blood count (CBC), PIVKA-II marker,Platelet count, and Bleeding time.Imaging tests: X-rays andMagnetic resonance imaging (MRI).TreatmentOralVitamin KsupplementsSystemic Vitamin K supplements
Specialists to consultGeneral physicianPediatricianGastroenterologistHematologistNutritionist
SYMPTOMS OF VITAMIN K DEFICIENCY
Symptoms Of Vitamin K Deficiency

The main symptom of Vitamin K deficiency is uncontrolled bleeding. Other symptoms that are seen in adults include:

Easy bruising
Heavy periods
Menstrual cramps
Bleeding from gums and teeth
Vomiting
Petechiae (little red spots)
Nose bleeding
Jaundice
Pale skin
Bloody stool
Sleepiness
Weak bones
Irregular heart beats

Infants are at higher risk of Vitamin K deficiency until they start eating regular foods or until the normal intestinal bacteria start making Vitamin K. The signs and symptoms that are usually seen in newborns and infants are:

Hemolytic anemia (rupturing of red blood cells)
Bleeding (hemorrhage) within the brain
Retinopathy (damage of the retina of the eye)
Weakened muscles
Kernicterus (excessive bilirubin build-up in the brain)

Don’t let Vitamin K or other vitamin deficiencies impact your health. Explore our wide range of supplements after consulting your doctor to support a balanced, healthier you.
Find Vitamin Supplements Here
CAUSES OF VITAMIN K DEFICIENCY
Causes Of Vitamin K deficiency

Vitamin K is a fat-soluble vitamin essential for blood clotting, bone health, and preventing heart calcification.
It has three forms, K1 from leafy greens, K2 from fermented foods, and the synthetic K3, now replaced due to potential toxicity.
Vitamin K deficiency disrupts the carboxylation (turning on) of clotting factors, reducing their ability to bind to cell membranes and form blood clots.
This leads to increased bleeding risk due to underactive clotting proteins.
Several factors can increase the risk of vitamin K deficiency which are discussed in the next segment.
RISK FACTORS OF VITAMIN K DEFICIENCY
Risk Factors Of Vitamin K deficiency

The risk factors of Vitamin K deficiency include:
1. INADEQUATE DIETARY INTAKE
1. Inadequate dietary intake
The primary cause of Vitamin K deficiency is insufficient consumption of green leafy vegetables, such as broccoli and sprouts, fish, meat, eggs, etc.

2. GASTROINTESTINAL DISORDERS
2. Gastrointestinal disorders
Vitamin K is mainly absorbed in the upper small intestine. Any disease that can hinder this absorption, can lead to Vitamin K deficiency.
Some of the conditions include:
Diarrhea
Celiac disease
Cystic fibrosis
Inflammatory bowel disease
Blocked bile duct

Note:Sometimes, a part of the intestine is removed during bariatric surgery (weight loss surgery) which can also cause Vitamin K deficiency.
Curious about this surgery and who qualifies for it?
Read This

3. DISRUPTION OF GUT BACTERIA
3. Disruption of gut bacteria
It has been estimated that up to half of the daily Vitamin K requirement is provided by gut bacteria.
Any disruption in these bacteria can lead to a deficiency of Vitamin K.

4. FAMILY HISTORY
4. Family history
A family history of vitamin K deficiency can raise the risk due to genetics affecting nutrient absorption.
Inherited traits may impact how the body uses vitamin K, leading to potential deficiencies.


5.  INFANCY
5.  Infancy
Infants are at higher risk of vitamin K deficiency due to limited transfer from the the placenta, low levels in breast milk, and an underdeveloped gut.
Babies with liver disease or whose mothers used certain medications, like isoniazid or seizure treatments, face an even greater risk.

What is Vitamin K deficiency bleeding (VKBD)?
VKBD refers to the uncontrollable bleeding in babies due to a lack of Vitamin K. Infants who do not receive the Vitamin K shot are at higher risk of VKBD until 6 months of age.

6. MEDICATIONS
6. Medications
The prolonged use of antibiotics and blood thinners increases the risk of Vitamin K deficiency.
Did you know?
Vitamin K Deficiency Can Affect Your Heart!
Studies suggest that a lack of vitamin K may increase the risk of heart disease by causing hardening of the arteries, which makes blood flow more difficult.
DIAGNOSIS OF VITAMIN K DEFICIENCY
Diagnosis Of Vitamin K Deficiency

Vitamin K deficiency is diagnosed by assessing symptoms, medical history, physical exams, and specific blood tests. These include:

1. MEDICAL HISTORY AND PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
1. Medical history and physical examination
The doctor will ask about your symptoms, medical history, and any relevant factors such as diet and lifestyle.
During a physical exam for Vitamin K deficiency, they will check for signs like easy bruising, bleeding gums, nosebleeds, or other unusual bleeding, which indicate clotting issues.

2. LABORATORY TESTS
2. Laboratory tests
Coagulation profile:It helps detect vitamin K deficiency by showing prolonged clotting times, indicating impaired blood clotting.

Prothrombin time (PT) test:This blood test measures clotting time, which is longer in individuals with Vitamin K deficiency.

Complete blood count (CBC):This test measures red and white blood cells and platelets, helping detect anemia from Vitamin K deficiency by revealing low red blood cell counts.

PIVKA-II marker:This test detects under-carboxylated proteins in the blood, indicating a Vitamin K deficiency.

Platelet count:It helps assess Vitamin K deficiency, as low levels may indicate impaired clotting function related to the deficiency.

Bleeding time:This test checks how quickly small blood vessels close to stop bleeding, with Vitamin K deficiency potentially leading to prolonged bleeding

3. IMAGING TESTS
3. Imaging tests
X-rays:These can be used to assess bone density, which can be affected in severe cases of Vitamin K deficiency.


Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI):This scan can help in diagnosing any internal bleeding in the brain that can happen in children and adults due to Vitamin K deficiency.

Book your test easily from home with a single click!
Click Here

PREVENTION OF VITAMIN K DEFICIENCY
Prevention Of Vitamin K Deficiency

Here are a few tips suggested to avoid Vitamin K deficiency:
1. ENSURE SUFFICIENT INTAKE OF VITAMIN K
1. Ensure sufficient intake of Vitamin K
Make sure to get enough Vitamin K through a balanced diet or supplements to prevent deficiency.
2. BE CAUTIOUS OF CERTAIN MEDICATIONS
2. Be cautious of certain medications
The long-term use of certain medications such as antibiotics, warfarin, etc can interfere with Vitamin K
Use them with proper medical guidance to prevent deficiency.
3. TAKE CARE OF YOUR GUT
3. Take care of your gut
A healthy gut microbiome aids Vitamin K absorption, so include probiotics in your diet to support this beneficial bacteria.
Some natural examples of probiotic foods are:
Pickled cucumbers
Fermented dairy products such as coconut milk yogurt and almond milk yogurt
Kefir (fermented milk drink)
Sauerkraut (fermented cabbage)

You can also add probiotic supplements to your diet to enhance your gut health.Find Them Here
SPECIALIST TO VISIT
Specialist To Visit

Medical professionals to consult in case of Vitamin K deficiency include:

General Physician
Pediatrician
Gastroenterologist
Hematologist
Nutritionist

Ageneral physiciancan diagnose and treat Vitamin K deficiency through blood tests, dietary advice, and supplementation.


Apediatricianhelps to manage the condition in children.


Agastroenterologisthelps in dealing with the deficiency developed as a result of malabsorption.


Ahematologisthelps in managing the bleeding episodes developed due to prolonged deficiency of Vitamin K.


Anutritionistcan help with Vitamin K deficiency by assessing your dietary habits and developing a personalized meal plan to ensure adequate intake of this essential nutrient.

WHEN TO SEE A DOCTOR?
When to see a doctor?
See a doctor immediately  if you experience:
Unusual or easy bruising
Frequent nosebleeds or bleeding gums
Heavy or prolonged bleeding from cuts
Blood in stool or urine
Symptoms of anemia, like fatigue or weakness.

Noticing any of these symptoms? Do not take them lighly and get professional advice for right diagnosis and treatment.
Talk To An Expert
TREATMENT OF VITAMIN K DEFICIENCY
Treatment Of Vitamin K Deficiency

Mild cases of Vitamin K deficiency can be managed through diet. Increasing the consumption of foods rich in Vitamin K can be beneficial. Other treatment options include:

1.  ORALVITAMIN KSUPPLEMENTS
1.  OralVitamin Ksupplements

For mild to moderate Vitamin K deficiency, oral supplements are typically prescribed in the form of Vitamin K1 supplements.

Buy Vitamin K Supplements


3. SYSTEMIC VITAMIN K SUPPLEMENTS
3. Systemic Vitamin K supplements
In severe Vitamin K deficiency, intravenous Vitamin K may be prescribed to ensure direct absorption by bypassing the digestive system.
Infants can receive a single Vitamin K1 injection at birth to prevent deficiency.

4. VITAMIN K DEFICIENCY DUE TO MALABSORPTION IN INFANTS
4. Vitamin K Deficiency Due to Malabsorption in Infants
For infants with malabsorption, high daily oral doses of Vitamin K1 are given.
Injections are considered if oral dosing isn’t effective.

5. TREATMENT OF NEONATAL VKDB
5. Treatment of Neonatal VKDB
Treatment for neonatal VKDB involves giving 1–2 mg of Vitamin K1 through slow IV or subcutaneous infusion.
For severe bleeding, fresh frozen plasma may also be used.

6. TREATMENT OF VKCFD (VITAMIN K–DEPENDENT CLOTTING FACTOR DEFICIENCY)
6. Treatment of VKCFD (Vitamin K–Dependent Clotting Factor Deficiency)
VKCFD treatment includes  Vitamin K1 orally 2–3 times a week, or by IV if needed.
For surgeries or severe bleeding, fresh frozen plasma, prothrombin complex, or recombinant factor VII may be given.

7. PROPHYLAXIS IN NEWBORNS
7. Prophylaxis In Newborns
Newborns typically receive vitamin K1 via injection within their first hour.
Injections are preferred due to their higher effectiveness in preventing deficiency.

Get guaranteed delivery of all your medications with India's most trusted and largest online pharmacy.
Add Your Prescription
HOME CARE FOR VITAMIN K DEFICIENCY
Home care For Vitamin K deficiency

To obtain the recommended intake of vitamin  K, it is advisable to consume a diverse selection of foods, including the following options:

Add More Green Leaf:Incorporate more green leafy vegetables likespinach, kale,broccoli,cabbage, etc to boost Vitamin K intake and help prevent deficiency.

Eggs (Ande):These are an excellent source of Vitamin K, especially the egg yolks which contain higher levels of the nutrient compared to the whites.

Eggs offer numerous benefits beyond just helping with Vitamin K deficiency.
Know More

Milk and other dairy products:Milk, along with cheese and paneer, is rich in Vitamin K. It is easily and rapidly absorbed in the stomach compared to other sources.

Natto (Fermented Soy):Natto, a traditional Japanese dish made from fermented soybeans and typically is an excellent source of Vitamin K2.

How To Use It?
To enjoy natto, simply mix it with soy sauce or mustard for added flavor and serve it over warm rice as a nutritious topping.

Fermented milk (kefir):It is a fermented dairy drink that’s similar to a thin yogurt.  It is a rich source of Vitamin K with other vitamins and minerals too.

How To Use It?
It can be consumed as it is or poured over cereal or mixed in a smoothie.

Sauerkraut (Khatti gobhi):This is made from fermented cabbage. Like other fermented foods, it’s full of good bacteria that help keep your gut microbiome in balance.

How To Use It?
Sauerkraut can be enjoyed as a side dish, added to sandwiches, or used as a topping for sausages and salads.

Animal-derived food products:Foods such as fish (salmon, trout, sardines, and tuna), meat, and organ meats like liver are exceptionally high in this vitamin.

Eating food doesn't always ensure proper nutrition. Here are some simple tips to boost nutrient absorption from your meals.
Click To Know More
COMPLICATIONS OF VITAMIN K DEFICIENCY
Complications Of Vitamin K Deficiency

Vitamin K deficiency can lead to various complications and health problems. Here are some of the potential complications associated with Vitamin K deficiency:

Bleeding:This is the most significant complication because of Vitamin K deficiency and is often fatal in infants.

Easy bruising:Vitamin K-deficient individuals get easily bruised. Sometimes, a little bump can manifest as a large bruise that does not heal quickly.


Excessive bleeding:Low levels of Vitamin K lead to extreme bleeding wounds, especially from the gums or nose.


Increased fracture rates:A deficiency of Vitamin K leads to a loss of bone density. People with low levels of this vitamin leads are at risk of developing osteoporosis.
Increased rates of fractures, pain, and aches in the joints and bones are signs of Vitamin K deficiency. Try our widest range of pain relief products to ease your symptoms.Shop Now
Cardiovascular Disease:A deficiency in Vitamin K has been associated with increased calcium deposition in the heart, which may lead to cardiovascular disease.

If you or your loved ones have Vitamin K deficiency, it's important to actively monitor your heart as well.
Book Heart Health Package
LIVING WITH VITAMIN K DEFICIENCY
Living With Vitamin K deficiency

Living with a Vitamin K deficiency requires careful management and attention to your diet and overall health. The biggest concern with Vitamin K deficiency is excessive bleeging. Here are ways to control and manage bleeding episodes:

Apply pressure:Press a clean cloth firmly against the wound to help stop the bleeding by promoting clot formation.
Elevate the affected area:Raise the bleeding limb above the heart to reduce blood flow and minimize bleeding.
Use ice packs:Place ice on the wound to constrict blood vessels, slowing down the bleeding process.
Avoid movement:Keep the injured area still to prevent further damage or increased blood flow that could worsen bleeding.
Seek medical help:If bleeding doesn’t stop or is severe, seek immediate medical attention to prevent complications.

Unstoppable bleeding can be life-threatening. Learn how to give first aid in case of bleeding.
Read This Now

TIPS FOR PARENTS
Tips For Parents
Vitamin K deficiency is common in newborns and infants. Things parents can do include:
Follow doctor’s recommendations: Ensure prescribed Vitamin K doses or supplements are taken as advised.
Monitor for signs of bleeding: Watch for unusual bruising, nosebleeds, or bleeding gums.
Ensure a balanced diet: Include Vitamin K-rich foods like leafy greens and fermented foods in their diet.
Limit medications that affect Vitamin K: Consult your doctor before giving medications that may interfere with Vitamin K absorption.
Get regular check-ups: Keep up with pediatric visits to monitor Vitamin K levels and overall health.Did our information help you?In our relentless endeavour to keep improving our services, you are our eyes. Kindly take out sometime to guide us on how to serve your better.Share your feedbackSubscribe to stay informedSubscribe to our carefully crafted informative emailers by Medical Experts and be the first to get the latest health news, tips and important updates.SubmitDisclaimerTata 1mg's sole intention is to ensure that its consumers get information that is expert-reviewed, accurate and trustworthy. However, the information contained herein should NOT be used as a substitute for the advice of a qualified physician. The information provided here is for informational purposes only. This may not cover all possible side effects, drug interactions or warnings or alerts. Please consult your doctor and discuss all your queries related to any disease or medicine. We intend to support, not replace, the doctor-patient relationship.

--- REFERENCES ---

- Eden RE, Coviello JM. Vitamin K Deficiency. [Updated 2022 Jul 4]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2023 Jan  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK536983/)
- Kher P, Verma RP. Hemorrhagic Disease of Newborn. [Updated 2023 Jun 26]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2024 Jan-. Available from:  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK558994/ )
- Imbrescia K, Moszczynski Z. Vitamin K. [Updated 2023 Jul 10]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2023 Jan  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK551578/)
- Brousseau TJ, Kissoon N, McIntosh B. Vitamin K deficiency mimicking child abuse. J Emerg Med. 2005 Oct  (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16183447/)
- Vitamin K may offer protective health benefits in older age. Harvard Medical School. September 2020.  (https://www.health.harvard.edu/staying-healthy/vitamin-k-may-offer-protective-health-benefits-in-older-age)
- Institute of Medicine (US) Committee on Military Nutrition Research; Marriott BM, editor. Nutritional Needs in Hot Environments: Applications for Military Personnel in Field Operations. Washington (DC): National Academies Press (US); 1993. 8  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK236216/)
- Vitamin. Harvard T.N. Chan. March 2023.  (https://www.hsph.harvard.edu/nutritionsource/vitamin-k/)
- Vitamin K. National Institute Of Health.  (https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/VitaminK-HealthProfessional/)
- What is Vitamin K Deficiency Bleeding? Centers For Disease Control and Prevention. July 2023.  (https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/vitamink/facts.html)
- Mladěnka P, Macáková K, Kujovská Krčmová L, Javorská L, Mrštná K, Carazo A, Protti M, Remião F, Nováková L; OEMONOM researchers and collaborators. Vitamin K - sources, physiological role, kinetics, deficiency, detection, therapeutic use, and toxicity. Nutr Rev. 2022 Mar 10;80(4):677-698.  (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8907489/ )
- Eden RE, Coviello JM. Vitamin K Deficiency. 2022 Jul 4. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2023 Jan  (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30725668/)
- Mladěnka P, Macáková K, Kujovská Krčmová L, Javorská L, Mrštná K, Carazo A, Protti M, Remião F, Nováková L; OEMONOM researchers and collaborators. Vitamin K - sources, physiological role, kinetics, deficiency, detection, therapeutic use, and toxicity. Nutr Rev. 2022 Mar 10  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8907489/)
- Ingold CJ, Sergent SR. Phytonadione (Vitamin K1) [Updated 2023 Jun 5]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2023 Jan  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK557622/)
- Hathaway WE. Vitamin K deficiency. Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health. 1993  (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7886607/)
- Goto S, Setoguchi S, Yamakawa H, Watase D, Terada K, Matsunaga K, Karube Y, Takata J. Prodrugs for Skin Delivery of Menahydroquinone-4, an Active Form of Vitamin K2(20), Could Overcome the Photoinstability and Phototoxicity of Vitamin K2(20). Int J Mol Sci. 2019 May 24;20(10)  (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6566782/ )
