https://www.1mg.com/diseases/zika-virus-disease-919#

ZIKA VIRUS DISEASE
Zika virus diseaseAlso known as Zika fever, Zika, Zika disease and ZIKV disease
OVERVIEW
Overview

Zika virus disease is a mosquito-borne viral infection caused by the Zika virus. Its name comes from the Zika forest of Uganda, where the virus was first isolated in 1947. The virus spreads to people primarily through the bite of an infected Aedes aegypti mosquito, the same mosquito that causes chikungunya, dengue, and yellow fever. However, it can also spread from mother to child during pregnancy or through sexual intercourse.

It is reported that four out of five people suffering from Zika virus disease do not experience any symptoms. For the people who show symptoms, the disease presents as fever, rash, conjunctivitis, muscle pain, and joint pain.

Remember, Zika virus disease is preventable. By taking simple steps to reduce mosquito bites, such as applying repellents, sleeping under nets, and wearing long sleeve clothes, you can significantly lower your risk. Pregnant women should take special precautionary measures to avoid complications such as birth defects.

The virus can be diagnosed through RT-PCR and IgM testing.

While there is no specific medication or vaccine for Zika infection, it's important to remember that most patients recover on their own with proper rest and supportive care. In case of pain and fever, paracetamol can be taken. However, Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as ibuprofen or aspirin should be avoided until your doctor confirms the absence of dengue fever.
KEY FACTS
Key FactsUsually seen inAll age groupsGender affectedBoth men and women but more common in womenBody part(s) involvedWhole bodyMimicking ConditionsDengueChikungunyaYellow feverWest Nile feverJapanese encephalitisTick-borne encephalitisNecessary health tests/imagingRT-PCR testSerology (IgM test)Plaque reduction neutralisation tests (PRNT)TreatmentFluids and restParacetamolSpecialists to consultGeneral physicianInfectious disease specialistGynaecologist
SYMPTOMS OF ZIKA VIRUS DISEASE
Symptoms Of Zika Virus Disease

The incubation period (the time from exposure to symptoms) of Zika virus disease is 3 to 14 days. Symptoms are usually indistinguishable from other diseases such asdengue& chikungunya and persist for 2 to 7 days. The symptoms include:

FeverRashConjunctivitisMuscle painJoint painMalaiseHeadache

Patients might also experience some other symptoms such as:

Abdominal painDiarrhoeaConstipationPhotophobiaSmall ulcers on the oral mucosaHearing impairmentVomiting
CAUSES OF ZIKA VIRUS DISEASE
Causes Of Zika Virus Disease

Most people contract the Zika infection through mosquito bites.

The virus is primarily spread by the bite of an infected Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus mosquito, which breed in or near stagnant water. These mosquitoes usually bite during the day, peaking in the early morning and late afternoon/evening.


Listen to our expert discuss diseases commonly spread by mosquitoes.


RISK FACTORS FOR ZIKA VIRUS DISEASE
Risk Factors For Zika Virus Disease

The factors that increase the risk of Zika virus disease include:Residing in the Zika-infected areaNot taking adequate precautions to prevent mosquito bites.Travelling to the areas where there are Zika outbreaksHaving unprotected sex with with a person having Zika virus diseaseTransfusion of blood and blood productsFrom mother to foetus during pregnancyIs your home a mosquito magnet?
If you always wonder why there are so many mosquitoes in your house even if your home is clean, then the answer could be that your house is a mosquito magnet. Yes, there are some secret breeding spots for mosquitoes in your house that you have been overlooking.Read to Know More
DIAGNOSIS OF ZIKA VIRUS DISEASE
Diagnosis Of Zika Virus Disease

Zika virus disease is usually advised to be diagnosed within a week of developing symptoms or in case you or your partner have recently travelled to a contaminated area.

The most common testing methods include:

1.Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)


This method detects the Zika virus's RNA (genetic material). It is a rapid, sensitive, and specific method for early detection. The test can be done with urine, saliva, and blood samples and can detect the virus during the first 3 to 5 days after the onset of infection.
This test helps to differentiate between similar infections such as dengue fever or chikungunya infection.

2. Serology


The method can detect the presence of antibodies after four days of illness. Antibody(IGM) levels are variable but generally become positive starting in the first week after the onset of symptoms and continuing for up to 12 weeks post-symptom onset or exposure, but may persist for months to years.
This test is not generally recommended as it cannot differentiate from other viral infections, such as dengue, chikungunya, and yellow fever.

3. Plaque reduction neutralisation tests (PRNT)

This is a quantitative assay that measures virus-specific neutralising antibody titers. PRNTs can resolve false-positive IgM antibodies.
This test is commonly acknowledged as the gold standard, However it has limitations in terms of time, cost and resources.

Don’t ignore any symptoms. Instead, get tested. Lab tests are just a click away.
Book Now
Examination during pregnancy
During pregnancy, several tests can be done to identify congenital Zika virus infection. These include:

1.Ultrasound
Serial ultrasounds (every 3 to 4 weeks) are recommended for Zika-infected (or suspected) pregnant women. The test can detect various brain-related abnormalities of the foetus, such as microcephaly.

2. Amniocentesis
This procedure, which involves testing the amniotic fluid for possible Zika virus infection, is a proactive step that can be taken after 15 weeks of gestation. Early detection significantly increases the chances of managing the infection, empowering you to take control of your health and your baby's well-being.

Several tests such as anemia,diabetes, hepatitis B and C, andHIVconducted during pregnancy can minimise or prevent various health threats.

Learn about some of the basic tests and their importance during pregnancy.
Read Now

PREVENTION OF ZIKA VIRUS DISEASE
Prevention Of Zika Virus Disease

Zika virus disease is preventable. By taking the following simple steps to reduce mosquito bites, you can significantly lower your risk:
I. PREVENT MOSQUITO BITES
I. Prevent mosquito bites

1. Use mosquito repellents
These are available in patches, bands, creams, and lotions. Mosquito repellants protect against mosquitoes both indoors and outdoors. They can be chemical-based or natural.

Protect yourself from Mosquitoes. Explore our wide range of mosquito repellents.
Add to Cart

Tips to follow while using repellants
Avoid spraying the repellant on the skin under clothing.
Apply sunscreen first, if you are applying it with a repellant.
Read complete instructions to avoid any reaction.
Do not apply insect repellent to a child’s hands, eyes, mouth, cuts, or irritated skin.

Learn more about applying mosquito repellants correctly.
Read Along
2. Avoid stagnant water
Mosquitoes lay eggs in and around standing water. The following measures can be taken to avoid standing water.


Drain out water from buckets and mugs after washing & bathing.
Cover up water storage containers with tight lids.
Remove standing water from flower pots, AC trays, and coolers.
Clean roof gutters, home coolers and swimming pools regularly.
Keep native larvivorous fishes in the pools as they feed on mosquitoes.

3. Restrict entry of mosquitoes from outdoors
The infected mosquitoes breeding eggs outside in the trash containers can enter the house. The best way is to prevent their entry. This can be done by taking the following measures:


Use nets and screens for doors and windows.
Keep windows and doors close.
Fix all the holes of doors and windows, if any.
Cover baby carriers with net.

4. Cover yourself
One can avoid the mosquito bite by wearing protective clothing. While you are dressing up, follow the measures such as:

Wear full sleeve clothes and pantsWash clothing & gear such as shoes, pants, socks, etc with insecticideWear light-coloured clothesAllow the clothes to dry completely before wearing

5. Sleep under mosquito nets
It is one of the conventional and effective ways to prevent mosquito bites. These nets can be mounted on your bed. The fine mesh of the nets restricts the entry of mosquitoes.

Have you tried the latest range of mosquito repellants like mosquito repellent bands, patches and more? If not, have a look!
Check Out Here

II. FOLLOW SAFE SEXUAL PRACTICES
II. Follow safe sexual practices
Zika virus disease can be transmitted through vaginal, oral & anal sex. Sharing of sex toys can also pass the virus to other people.

The virus can stay in semen (viral persistence in testes can last up to 160 days) and vaginal secretions for a longer time than any other body fluids (urine & blood). The following preventive measures can be taken to reduce the chances of infection:Use condoms while having vaginal, oral, and anal sexAvoid sharing of sex toysUse dental dams while having oral sex

Condoms can not only act as an effective contraceptive but also protect you from a wide range of sexually transmitted diseases.
But, are you using condoms in the right way?
Click To Read

SPECIALIST TO VISIT
Specialist To Visit

In most cases, the symptoms of Zika infection are usually mild and often go away on their own. However, visiting a clinician and early intervention may lead to slow progression and early disease resolution.
The specialists who can help treat this infection include:General PhysicianInfectious disease specialistGynecologist

In case of pregnancy, women should visit their obstetrician-gynaecologist as the Zika infection is known to cause several complications in the foetus.

If you're experiencing any symptoms, we strongly advise seeking guidance from our team of world-class medical professionals.

Consult Now
TREATMENT OF ZIKA VIRUS DISEASE
Treatment Of Zika Virus Disease

There is no specific treatment or vaccine available for Zika virus disease. The treatment is usually aimed to reduce the symptoms. Most of the patients usually recover on their own by taking proper rest & supportive care.To prevent dehydration, people are advised to drink plenty of fluids, such as water and coconut water.Patients must prioritise rest because the infection can lead to tiredness and fever. This is vital to the treatment process and can significantly aid their recovery.In case of body pain and fever,Paracetamolcan be taken.Pregnant women living in the areas of active Zika transmission or having symptoms should immediately consult their doctors.

Note:It's important to note that Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as Ibuprofen or Aspirin should be avoided until your doctor confirms the absence of dengue fever. This precaution can help prevent potential complications.
HOME CARE FOR ZIKA VIRUS DISEASE
Home care For Zika Virus Disease

Once you have Zika virus, there are very few chances that you will experience any symptoms. Symptoms are usually mild and rarely require hospitalisation. However, it is essential to take care of the following points:Consume plenty of water and other fluids like coconut water, soups, etc.Take adequate rest.Regularly sanitise your surroundings. This is an essential step in preventing the spread of Zika virus.Control mosquitoes both inside and outside your home.Abstain from any sexual activity as it may transmit the infection to your partner.Do not plan to conceive for at least 2 to 3 months after the recovery.Pregnant women should regularly meet their gynaecologist to screen for any foetal abnormalities.

Dietary Inclusions

You can also include the following in your diet to boost your immunity to fight against the infection:

Garlic (Lehsun):With its anti-inflammatory properties, garlic is a powerful ally in fighting infections. Allicin, a key ingredient in garlic, boosts immunity and reduces muscle pain and fever. The best part? It's easy to include in your diet, whether raw, cooked, or powdered, making it a simple yet practical addition to your health routine.

Papaya (Papita):Papaya enhances immunity which helps in fighting infections. It also acts as an antioxidant.

Note: Papaya should not be consumed during pregnancy.

Vitamin C:Foods rich in Vitamin C, such as oranges, strawberries & kiwi, are known to enhance immunity and can aid in faster recovery.

You can also take Vitamin C supplements to fill any gaps in your diet.
Add to Cart
TIPS FOR CAREGIVERS

Tips for caregivers

When caring for a Zika-infected patient, it's crucial to follow these precautionary measures. They play a key role in reducing the risk of transmission, ensuring your safety and that of others.Do not touch blood or body fluids such as urine or vomit of the infected personWash hands properly after meeting with the infected personRemove and wash clothes timely and immediately if they are exposed to any blood or other fluidsSanitise the person's environment and belongings dailyTake necessary steps to avoid mosquito bitesKeep doors and windows closeUse mosquito nets for babies
COMPLICATIONS OF ZIKA VIRUS DISEASE
Complications Of Zika Virus Disease

People suffering from Zika virus disease usually recover on their own. The disease is mild and rarely requires hospitalisation. But, in some cases, the diseases can cause several complications. Pregnant women are at high risk of developing complications.


CONGENITAL ZIKA SYNDROME
Congenital Zika syndrome
There is a strong link between Zika virus infection during pregnancy & birth defects in children. An infected pregnant woman can pass the virus to her developing baby. It can cause a group of birth defects in the child known as congenital Zika syndrome. It can affect the growth & development of the developing baby. The possible abnormalities include:

Smaller brain and collapsed skull (microcephaly)Decreased brain tissueScarring at the back of eyeReduced mobility of the jointsReduced movement of the body immediately after the birthEpilepsyIntellectual disabilityRespiratory infectionDysphagiaNeural tube defectsCerebral palsyLow birth weightVision problems


GUILLAIN-BARRÉ SYNDROME (GBS)
Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS)
Zika virus disease can rarely cause Guillain-Barre Syndrome(GBS). It is a neurological disorder in which the immune system damages nerve cells. It can lead to muscle weakness. In advanced stages, muscles that control breathing can also be affected.
Usually, patients recover from GBS within several months. Rarely, it causes permanent damage.
OTHER NEUROLOGICAL DISORDERS

Other neurological disorders
Zika virus disease can also lead to some central nervous system-related disorders, such as neuropathy (nerve damage) & myelitis (inflammation of the spinal cord).

Encephalitis(Inflammation of the brain)Meningoencephalitis (inflammation of both the brain and its surrounding membranes)Retinopathies  (Damage to the retina of the eye)
THROMBOCYTOPENIA

Thrombocytopenia
Very rarely, Zika virus disease can cause thrombocytopenia. People with this disorder have less number of platelets which can result in bleeding, bruising and slow blood clotting.


PREGNANCY LOSS
Pregnancy loss
The infection of Zika virus in pregnant women increases the chances of miscarriages, preterm birth & still birth.Did our information help you?In our relentless endeavour to keep improving our services, you are our eyes. Kindly take out sometime to guide us on how to serve your better.Share your feedbackSubscribe to stay informedSubscribe to our carefully crafted informative emailers by Medical Experts and be the first to get the latest health news, tips and important updates.SubmitDisclaimerTata 1mg's sole intention is to ensure that its consumers get information that is expert-reviewed, accurate and trustworthy. However, the information contained herein should NOT be used as a substitute for the advice of a qualified physician. The information provided here is for informational purposes only. This may not cover all possible side effects, drug interactions or warnings or alerts. Please consult your doctor and discuss all your queries related to any disease or medicine. We intend to support, not replace, the doctor-patient relationship.

--- REFERENCES ---

- Vector control operations framework for Zika virus, World Health Organisation, Last updated on: 29 May, 2016.  (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-ZIKV-VC-16.4)
- Zika virus response updates from FDA, US Food and Drug Administration, Last updated on: 13 May, 2021.  (https://www.fda.gov/emergency-preparedness-and-response/mcm-issues/zika-virus-response-updates-fda)
- Treatment, Zika virus, Centre for Disease Control & Prevention, Last updated on: 21 May, 2019.  (https://www.cdc.gov/zika/symptoms/treatment.html)
- Zika virus, World Health Organisation, Last updated on: 20 July, 2018.  (https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/zika-virus)
- Symptoms, Testing and Treatment, Centre for Disease Control & Prevention, Last updated on: 21 May, 2019.  (https://www.cdc.gov/zika/symptoms/symptoms.html)
- Claudio C Cirne Santos, Natural Products Against the Zika Virus. 2020.  (https://biomedgrid.com/fulltext/volume7/natural-products-against-the-zika-virus.001146.php)
- Prevention and Transmission, Zika virus, Centre for Disease Control & Prevention, Last updated on: 24 July, 2019.  (https://www.cdc.gov/zika/prevention/transmission-methods.html)
- Rawal, G., Yadav, S., & Kumar, R. (2016). Zika virus: An overview. Journal of family medicine and primary care, 5(3), 523–527.  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5290753/)
- Prenatal care, Zika and Pregnancy, Centre for Disease Control & Prevention, Last updated on: 30 March, 2021.  (https://www.cdc.gov/pregnancy/zika/testing-follow-up/prenatal-care.html)
- Sexual transmission and prevention, Zika virus, Centre for Disease Control & Prevention, Last updated on: 21 May, 2019.  (https://www.cdc.gov/zika/prevention/sexual-transmission-prevention.html)
- Sharp TM, Muñoz-Jordán J, Perez-Padilla J, Bello-Pagán MI, Rivera A, Pastula DM, Salinas JL, Martínez Mendez JH, Méndez M, Powers AM, Waterman S. Zika virus infection associated with severe thrombocytopenia. Clinical Infectious Diseases. 2016 Nov 1;63(9):1198-201.  (https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/63/9/1198/2576494)
- Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India. [Title of the document if available]. Available from:  (https://main.mohfw.gov.in/sites/default/files/36636857241454909391_1.pdf [Accessed 5 July 2024].)
